Information resources available for victims of Hurricane Harvey
Contributed information
Save
BROWNSVILLE – Rep. Filemon Vela (D-Brownsville) released the following information for constituents in need of disaster assistance due to Hurricane Harvey:
“Yesterday, several of my colleagues in the Texas delegation, Gov. Abbott and I sent letters to President Trump requesting he declare a major disaster for the State of Texas as a result of Hurricane Harvey. Last night (Aug. 25), President Trump issued a State of Disaster Declaration for the State of Texas, triggering the release of federal funds to help victims recover from Hurricane Harvey in the following counties: Bee, Goliad, Kleberg, Nueces, Refugio, and San Patricio.
Today (Aug. 26), I was briefed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency(FEMA)Administrator Brock Long, National Weather Service Deputy Regional Director Mike Coyne, Texas Department of Emergency Management Chief Nim Kidd, U.S. Coast Guard Atlantic Area Vice Admiral Karl Schultz, and American Red Cross Executive Director of Recovery Operations Harvey Johnson on an update on Hurricane Harvey’s impact thus far, as well as its potential impact throughout Texas and Louisiana. 
If you are a resident of Bee, Goliad, Kleberg, Nueces, Refugio, or San Patricio County and your home has sustained damage from Hurricane Harvey, I urge you to seek a safe shelter first, and then apply for assistance with FEMA. The American Red Cross has opened 35 shelters and expects to open an additional 40 tomorrow (Aug. 27). Download the FEMA mobile app to set up alerts for the latest weather updates, shelter information, disaster resources, preparedness information, and safety tips, in English and in Spanish. The app provides a customizable checklist of emergency supplies, maps of open shelters and recovery centers, disaster survival tips, and weather alerts from the National Weather Service. The app also enables users to receive push notifications reminding them to take important steps to prepare their homes and families for disasters. 
To apply for assistance visit www.DisasterAssistance.gov . You may also call the registration phone number at 1-800-621-3362; those who have a speech disability or hearing loss and use TTY, should call 1-800-462-7585 directly; for those who use 711 or Video Relay Service (VRS), call 1-800-621-3362. If you have flood insurance, you will need to reach out to your local insurance agents, or call 1-800-621-3362 and select option 2.
Those who would like to assist victims of Hurricane Harvey may do so by donating or volunteering with the American Red Cross, or other organizations assisting with the situation. To donate or volunteer through the American Red Cross, visit redcross.org or call 1-800-RED CROSS or text the word REDCROSS to 90999 to make a $10 donation.
