Update on AEP Texas Hurricane Harvey Restoration
Posted:
Updated:
(AEP Texas Facebook)
Approximately 107,000 customers in the Coastal Bend remain without power as of 5:30 p.m. Wednesday after Hurricane Harvey made landfall Friday night near Rockport. That number compares with 220,000 consumers left without power at the peak of outages, which happened at 2 p.m. Saturday.
Outage Update
Shown below is a breakdown of areas with the largest concentration of remaining outages:
Aransas Pass-Rockport Area - 41,900
Kenedy - 130
Estimated Time of Restoration (ETR)
AEP Texas currently has over 4,600 resources from around the country working in the Coastal Bend area to restore power to customers. AEP Texas predicts that by Wednesday August 30 at 10 p.m. crews will have restored power to 95 percent of the customers within the City of Corpus Christi, as well as the Sinton area.
AEP Texas will release preliminary ETRs for the following heavily impacted areas by Thursday, Aug. 31: Portland; Gregory; Ingleside; Aransas Pass; Rockport; Fulton; Port Aransas; Taft; Bayside; Lamar; Bonnieview; Woodsboro; Refugio; Tivoli; Austwell; Seadrift; Port Lavaca; and Point Comfort.
Public Safety
AEP Texas reminds residents, volunteers and first responders to make safety a priority in all of the areas affected by Hurricane Harvey. Downed power lines should be considered energized and dangerous. Please report downed power lines and other safety hazards like broken poles to AEPTexas.com or by calling (866) 223-8508.
Additionally, AEP Texas asks all consumers who are currently using generators to follow all safety precautions from the manufacturer. Generators should never be used inside the home.
Lastly, as power is being restored to customers around the area, residents are reminded to clear cooktops and electric stoves of any debris; and ovens should be turned off.
Damage Assessments
The confirmed number of distribution poles down totals 1,318 poles, but AEP Texas estimates that at least 2,100 distribution poles and 500 transmission structures were damaged or knocked down by the storm. Damage assessment continues through the affected areas. Crews will continue to work until service has been restored to all customers impacted by the storm.
Outage map
Customers can track progress on the restoration effort by visiting the outage map at www.aeptexas.com. It features the most current available information. Customers also can sign up for outage alerts to receive updates via text or email.
The KZTV10.COM application is available now on the App Store™ and Android App Store !
Apple, the Apple logo, iPod, and iTunes are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the U.S. and other countries. iPhone is a trademark of Apple Inc.
WEATHER
