Activate your digital access.
Family mourns the death of Rockport man who was Hurricane Harvey's first fatality
Tim Acosta, Corpus Christi Caller-Times Published 4:01 p.m. CT Sept. 5, 2017 | Updated 9:28 p.m. CT Sept. 5, 2017
Arthur and Christi Adams
CONNECT TWEET LINKEDIN COMMENTEMAILMORE
When Hurricane Harvey made landfall in Rockport on Aug. 25, Christi Adams was more than 150 miles away in San Antonio with her 13-year-old son, Nathan.
Her husband, 39-year-old Arthur Curtis Adams, had stayed behind in Rockport. He was working to board up homes in the area and was hoping to leave before the storm made landfall, which it later did as a Category 4 hurricane with wind speeds of about 130 mph. When Christi and the couple's son left the day before to take shelter with family, Arthur let them know he was hoping to borrow a truck to evacuate on Friday.
Buy Photo
This trailer was destroyed in a fire shortly after Hurricane Harvey made landfall on Aug. 25, killing 39-year-old Arthur Adams. The structure, located along Farm-to-Market Road 3036 in Rockport, caught fire for an as-yet-unknown reason. Firefighters were unable to respond to the blaze due to the dangerous weather conditions at the time. Adams was the first confirmed fatality from Hurricane Harvey.
 (Photo: Tim Acosta/Caller-Times)
That did not happen.
"He said, 'I'm going to be fine,' " Christi Adams said.
Shortly after Harvey made landfall, Aransas County officials said they received word of a structure on fire along Farm-to-Market Road 3036. However, the dangerous weather conditions made it impossible for emergency responders or firefighters to provide any kind of assistance. They later announced that a person lost his or her life in the blaze, which destroyed a trailer. The death was the first attributed to Hurricane Harvey in the United States.
County leaders have not officially identified the remains that were later turned over to the Nueces County Medical Examiner's Office. Investigators are having to rely on DNA testing to provide a definitive identification, a process that is still ongoing, officials have said. But Christi Adams confirmed her husband's death when contacted by a Corpus Christi Caller-Times reporter on Tuesday.
"We just can't believe he's gone," she said. "It's just a terrible tragedy."
Christi Adams said she and Arthur had been together for nearly 18 years. The couple were married by common-law, and Christi went by Arthur's last name, though her legal last name is "Rhodes." They planned to have a commitment ceremony on their 20th anniversary, she added. He leaves behind his wife and five children.
After a mandatory evacuation was issued on Aug. 24 for Rockport and the surrounding area, Arthur told Christi and their son to head to San Antonio to stay with another son, Josh, and his family. After learning that Arthur was unable to find transportation out of Rockport, Christi Adams said the family offered to turn around to go get him.
Arthur refused, citing the heavy traffic north from the coastal areas, she said.
"He didn't want us to turn around," she added.
Christi Adams said her husband told her he'd planned to be up by 5 a.m. on Aug. 25 to help board up windows for three homes. He later said he would ride the storm out at the couple's trailer, while also keeping an eye on their belongings. After Harvey made landfall, power outages and heavy damage made outside contact via cell phones difficult. She was also unsure what her husband had in terms of supplies, given that most stores were closed due to the storm and he had been working through Friday.
"That breaks my heart," she said.
After news reports surfaced of someone killed in a house fire in Rockport shortly after Harvey made landfall, Christi Adams said she did not believe it could be her husband. Nearly five years ago, he had an allergic reaction to some medication and was in a coma for over a week and went through a lengthy recovery.
Josh later drove from San Antonio to his father's trailer in Rockport and found it destroyed by a fire, she said. Emergency crews had already been at the site and removed Arthur's remains, which were later turned over to the Nueces County Medical Examiner's Office.
There has been difficulty coming to terms with Arthur's death, Christi Adams said, considering all he had overcome in the past.
"He's conquered and gone through so much in his life," she said. "I pray that he's at peace in paradise."
Christi Adams said she was able to see the site of the blaze earlier this week, and left a small cross near the charred remains of the trailer. She also pulled some small items from the wreckage that she said "miraculously" survived the fire, like part of a coffee cup that belonged to Arthur. Christi Adams said she wanted people to know her husband was someone who always put his family and others first, even up to the end.
"I would like people to know what a great man he was," she said. "He's going to live in our hearts forever."
A GoFundMe page has been set up by Arthur Adams' family to help cover funeral expenses and to help Christi and Nathan get back on their feet. The page can be found at www.GoFundMe.com by searching for "Rockport Hurricane Death Victim."
This is a developing story. Check back to www.caller.com for more updates.
Read or Share this story: http://callertim.es/2gE0oCH
From The USA TODAY NETWORK
These sites are part of the USA TODAY NETWORK. Their content is produced independently from our newsrooms.
