Continue reading the main story
Photo
From left, Presidents George Bush, Barack Obama, George W. Bush, Bill Clinton and Jimmy Carter at the White House in 2009. They have started a fund to help the victims of Hurricane Harvey. Credit J. Scott Applewhite/Associated Press
The five living former United States presidents joined forces on Thursday to start a hurricane recovery effort to raise money for victims of Hurricane Harvey in Texas.
The campaign, One America Appeal, began with a public service announcement featuring the presidents during the first N.F.L. game of the season on Thursday night. “People are hurting down here,” former President George W. Bush, who lives in Dallas, said in the video, “but as one Texan put it, ‘We’ve got more love in Texas than water.’”
The appeal was a rare showing of unity in American politics, and President Trump, who has disregarded traditional presidential decorum and has criticized some of his predecessors, endorsed their effort. “We will confront ANY challenge, no matter how strong the winds or high the water,” Mr. Trump said on Twitter on Thursday night. “I’m proud to stand with Presidents for #OneAmericaAppeal .”
One America Appeal Video by One America Appeal
The fund-raising effort is focused on people affected by Hurricane Harvey, the destructive storm that dumped more than 50 inches of rain in parts of southeast Texas and caused billions of dollars in damages and lost economic activity. The state is of particular importance for President Bush, who was governor there in the 1990s, and his father, President George Bush, who lives part of the year in Houston.
Newsletter Sign Up
Get the Morning Briefing by Email
What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
Sign Up
You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.
Thank you for subscribing.
An error has occurred. Please try again later.
You are already subscribed to this email.
