Search
SEARCH→
BROWSER UPDATE To gain access to the full experience, please upgrade your browser: Chrome | Safari | Firefox | Internet Explorer
Note: If you are running Internet Explorer 10 and above, make sure it is not in compatibility mode.
Weakened Harvey Douses Louisiana: Live Coverage
Last Updated Aug 31, 2017 at 4:42 pm ET
Tropical storm Harvey came ashore again on Wednesday, bringing heavy rains and whipping winds to southwestern Louisiana, but far less destruction than it brought to Texas.
All readers have open access to our coverage of the storm.
SHARE
Trump Will Give $1 Million for Harvey Victims: White House
See only Key Developments
Twitter
President Trump Will Give $1 Million for Harvey Storm Victims: White House
White House Press Secretary Sarah Sanders said President Donald Trump plans to donate $1 million to an unspecified charity in support of victims of Hurricane Harvey.
Mr. Trump is "pledging a million dollars of his own personal money to help the people of both Texas and Louisiana," Ms. Sanders said. She said she believed that the funds would come from Mr. Trump personally, not from a separate entity such as his family foundation.
Ms. Sanders didn't identify a charity that would be the recipient of the funds. Speaking at a press briefing at the White House, she said Mr. Trump wanted suggestions about the most appropriate group to receive the funds.
"He would like to join in the efforts" of Americans around the country who have given to charity to help victims of the storm, Ms. Sanders said.
Ted Mann
Twitter
Houston Schools Push Back Opening Date to Sept. 11 from Sept. 5
Floodwaters from Tropical Storm Harvey surround homes and businesses in Port Arthur, Texas, on Thursday. GERALD HERBERT/ASSOCIATED PRESS
Houston Independent School District said it will delay the start of school until Sept. 11 as the city starts to recover from the devastation of Hurricane Harvey.
The nation's seventh-largest district had already delayed the start of school from the original start date of Aug. 27 to Sept. 5.
In a statement Thursday, the district said it could still push back the state further depending on the weather and the condition of its facilities.
"We are eager to get our students back into the classroom and learning, but we need to be sure that our campuses are safe and that Houston’s infrastructure and roads are ready to handle transporting our students safely to school in the aftermath of Hurricane Harvey," said superintendent Richard Carranza in a statement. "We are currently assessing any damages to our schools."
The superintendent also said the district will relax its uniform policy for the first half of the school year. Administrators are returning to work on Sept. 5 and teachers will return Sept. 8.
Joseph Barrett
Twitter
Beaumont's Neches River Still Rising, Forecast to Crest Friday
Beaumont mainly draws its water from the Neches River, which has already well exceeded its prior peak crest, which occurred 23 years ago, and is forecast to peak around midday Friday, according to the National Weather Service.
Even still, the main problem for Beaumont and the region is the massive amount of rain that fell there, said Roger Erickson, a warning coordination meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Lake Charles, La. That sliver of Texas near the Louisiana border got hit with anywhere between 20 and 30 inches of rain in just 24 hours between Tuesday and Wednesday, he said.
“Basically what happened in Houston happened in this area the day after,” Mr. Erickson said. “That’s what caused just massive flooding across the communities.”
A boat sits near flooded homes in the aftermath of Tropical Storm Harvey in Beaumont, Texas, Thursday.Gerald Herbert/Associated Press
Jon Kamp
Twitter
Hospital Evacuations Under Way in Beaumont, Texas
A lack of city water forced evacuations at Baptist Hospitals of Southeast Texas in Beaumont, which said in a Facebook post that it had to start transferring patients to other acute-care facilities. TV news footage showed staffing loading a patient onto a waiting helicopter.
“Due to the city-wide lack of services, we have no other alternative but to discontinue all services which will include emergency services,” the hospital said.
Jon Kamp
Twitter
Texas City Independent Schools, Damaged by Harvey, Won't Reopen Until Sept. 11
All 14 schools in the Texas City Independent School District southeast of Houston sustained some Harvey-related damage. Most had roof leaks that can be easily fixed, but several schools including those in the city of La Marque flooded to varying degrees, a district spokeswoman said.
The primary school building in La Marque was “completely flooded with 3 feet of water,” the district’s website said. The elementary school had water in the cafeteria and hallways. Parts of the middle school had two feet of water, with the kitchen, library, hallways and some classrooms affected. Roof leaks at the high school caused flooding.
The district, with nearly 9,000 students, isn’t planning to resume classes until Sept. 11. Officials had earlier hoped to reopen Sept. 5.
-- Scott Calvert
Facebook
Twitter
Houston sporting-goods retailer Academy has converted its headquarters into a temporary residence for hundreds of police and other emergency responders, offering food and shelter in the midst of Tropical Storm Harvey's aftermath.
Facebook
Twitter
In Harvey’s Wake, Category 2 Hurricane Forms in Atlantic
As Texas and Louisiana continue to deal with the aftermath of Harvey, forecasters are monitoring another powerful hurricane that has formed in the distant Atlantic named Irma.
The storm is “rapidly intensifying over the eastern Atlantic,” the National Hurricane Center said in a late-morning update Thursday. Maximum sustained winds have reached nearly 100 miles per hour, making it a Category 2 storm.
The big question is where Irma will go, and what land the storm might threaten, but it remains too soon to tell. The hurricane center’s “forecast cone,” which looks at possible storm tracks through Tuesday morning, still puts Irma somewhere over the Atlantic to the east of the Leeward Islands.
Wherever it goes, the storm could pack a punch: “Irma is forecast to become a major hurricane by tonight and is expected to be an extremely dangerous hurricane for the next several days,” the hurricane center said.
Jon Kamp
