Facebook Twitter Google+ LinkedIn Pinterest
First death after Hurricane Harvey confirmed in Port A
A man missing in Port Aransas since Hurricane Harvey made landfall Aug. 25 was found dead Saturday, according to a post on Mayor Charles Bujan's Facebook page.
Post to Facebook
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Join the Conversation
To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs
First death after Hurricane Harvey confirmed in Port A
Alden Woods , The Republic | azcentral.com Published 5:17 p.m. CT Sept. 3, 2017 | Updated 6:37 p.m. CT Sept. 3, 2017
CLOSE
Port Aransas, a Texas Gulf Coast town, works to begin recovery after Hurricane Harvey. Video by Nick Oza/Gannett Nick Oza/USA Today Network
Buy Photo
Aerial view of Hurricane Harvey damage in Port Aransas, TX. Harvey struck the Coastal Bend as a Category 4 hurricane on Friday, August 25, 2017.
(Photo: Courtney Sacco and Matt Woolbright/Caller-Times)Buy Photo
CONNECT TWEET LINKEDIN COMMENTEMAILMORE
A man missing in Port Aransas since Hurricane Harvey made landfall Aug. 25 was found dead Saturday, according to a post on Mayor Charles Bujan's Facebook page. 
Police found Ronald Darrell Head, 57, dead in a residence in the 700 block of Sandcastle Drive. It is the first confirmed death in Port Aransas since Hurricane Harvey struck the Texas coast.
"I am very saddened to announce that Port Aransas has experienced it's (sic) first fatality," Bujan wrote on Facebook. "My prayers and heartfelt condolences go out to the family in their loss."
No official cause of death has been announced, though Bujan reported there were no obvious signs of foul play. 
Head called his mother Aug. 25, the day Harvey hit, and had been missing ever since. Port Aransas Police Chief Scott Burroughs told the Caller-Times on Friday that police had searched Head's home and could not find him, though public records list Head's last address in the 700 block of Sandcastle Drive. 
Read or Share this story: http://callertim.es/2eAIeF7
From The USA TODAY NETWORK
These sites are part of the USA TODAY NETWORK. Their content is produced independently from our newsrooms.
