Homes     are surrounded by Harvey's floodwaters on Tuesday, Aug. 29,     2017 in Spring, Texas. AP     Photo/David J. Phillip
Hurricane Harvey made landfall on the Texas Gulf       Coast August 25, with winds topping 130 mph.
By Thursday, August 31, it was making its way northeast     across Louisiana as a tropical depression with winds up to 20     mph.
A rain gauge near Highlands, Texas, registered 51.88     inches of rainfall, breaking the record for the continental     US.
At least 41 deaths have been reported, and officials     expect the toll to rise. Over 30,000 people have taken     refuge in shelters as dangerous flooding slowly     recedes.
The worst of Hurricane Harvey was over by Thursday, August 31,   but recovery from the rain and flooding in Texas and Louisiana is   expected to take months.
Harvey was downgraded to a tropical depression on Wednesday night, but   many parts of Texas and western Louisiana were still underwater a   week after the hurricane started. And the monster storm   is not done yet — it's expected to cause flash flooding   through many parts of Louisiana, Tennessee, Mississippi, and   Arkansas through Saturday.
Harvey's death toll continues to rise as family members and   authorities report more fatalities. Galveston County Emergency   Management confirmed   three more deaths on Wednesday night, bringing the total to   at least 41.
Some 33,000 people in Texas have sought refuge in more than 230   shelters, and 325,000 have signed up for disaster assistance, officials said.
"This is a landmark event for Texas," Brock Long, the Federal   Emergency Management Agency administrator, said Monday. "Texas   has never seen an event like this."
Record rainfall and catastrophic flooding
Harvey arrived on the shores of Texas as a hurricane Friday   night, packing sustained wind speeds as high as 130 mph. It made   a second landfall as a tropical storm on the Texas border near   Cameron, Louisiana, around 4:30   a.m. CDT on Wednesday. As of Thursday evening, it was   classified as a tropical depression with maximum winds of 20 mph.
On Tuesday, a rain gauge near Highlands, Texas registered 51.88   inches of rainfall — breaking the record for most rainfall   from a single storm in the entire continental US. Houston saw 44   inches, plunging much of the city underwater.
The storm's devastation continues to create problems in Texas.   Early Thursday morning, a chemical plant in Crosby — 25 miles   northeast of Houston — reported two explosions, and residents within a 1.5-mile   square radius evacuated.
Interstate   highway 45 is submerged from the effects of Hurricane Harvey seen   during widespread flooding in Houston, Texas on August 27,   2017. REUTERS/Richard   Carson
The "relentless, torrential" rain has moved east, and forecasters expect it to fizzle out by   Saturday.
The federal Weather Prediction Center said Tennessee, Kentucky, the   southeastern tip of Indiana, southern Ohio, and West Virginia   could see 2 to 5 inches of rain from the storm. Totals in   isolated areas from western Tennessee to central Kentucky could   reach 6 to 8 inches.
At 4 p.m. CDT on Thursday, Harvey was moving northeast across   Mississippi at 20 mph, leaving flooding and destruction in its   wake. The center of the storm was sitting about 109 miles north of   Jackson.
The storm surge — the quick rise in water caused by a hurricane's   strong winds — crested several feet at the height of the storm on   the Texas coast. By Thursday, all local storm surge warnings had   ended.
The National Weather Service called the rainfall event " unprecedented ",   and while the National Hurricane Center's warnings of "catastrophic and   life-threatening flooding" have subsided, the floodwaters in   southeast Texas and southwest Louisiana will take days, if not a   week, to retreat.
'Widespread devastation'
Dominic   Dominguez looks through a stack of boats jumbled in the wake of   Hurricane Harvey in in Rockport, Texas on Sunday, Aug. 27,   2017. AP   Photo/Eric Gay
Harvey's devastating hurricane-force winds, storm surge on the   Gulf Coast, and landmark flooding inland combined to make it a catastrophic   event for Texas.
Officials expect more deaths to be confirmed as Texas and Louisiana dig out from   the worst storm in over a decade. Houston police Chief Art   Acevedo told The Associated Press on Monday that he was "really   worried about how many bodies we're going to find" when the   floodwaters recede.
The Houston Chronicle reported Tuesday that a police Sgt. Steve   Perez, a 60-year-old man who had been on the force for 34 years,   died in his patrol car after he took a wrong turn and got caught   in the high water.
Long said on Wednesday that crews were still focusing on rescue   and recovery and would have to wait until the storm passed to   fully evaluate the damage. Flooding and debris on roadways   were still keeping emergency crews from reaching some   places.
On Thursday, Houston firefighters started going door-to-door in   order to search for survivors and survey the destruction. The   Texas Department of Public Safety reported that at least 37,000 homes had sustained major   damage and that 7,000 were destroyed.
Accounts of destruction in the areas hit hardest by Harvey   have been steadily emerging.
Astounding video shows numerous boats maneuvering around stranded vehicles on flooded street in Dickinson, Texas. https://t.co/YGP3fEVW8t pic.twitter.com/LHM5SbVftF
— Evan McMurry  (@evanmcmurry) August 27, 2017
Emergency crews plucked people from rooftops using aircraft, dump   trucks, and boats as the floodwaters rose .
Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner said 911 emergency services in the   city had received over 56,000 calls by Monday. Texas Gov. Greg Abbott said on   Wednesday that 8,500 people had been rescued statewide.
The Associated   Press estimated that the storm knocked out power for about   300,000 residents over the weekend, and that there were still   107,000 power outages in Texas on Wednesday afternoon. Energy companies  are working to restore power.
Turner announced a curfew on Tuesday night, extending from 12   a.m. to 5 a.m. Wednesday, amid reports of looting, armed   robberies and people impersonating police officers.
Near Port Arthur, Texas, a city located about 90 miles east of   Houston in Jefferson County, over 26 inches of rain were recorded on Tuesday alone.   Residents in the area were desperate to escape, and 150 boats   came to find them. Mayor Derrick Freeman told CBS News that 20,000 homes had as much as 6 feet of water in   them.
The coastal city of Rockport, Texas, located near the point where   the hurricane initially made landfall, also sustained extreme   damage.  Mayor Charles Wax of Rockport told CNN there had "been widespread   devastation."
As the storm approached Friday, Mayor Pro Tem Patrick Rios of   Rockport requested that people who did not evacuate write their   names and Social Security numbers on their arms in case rescuers   later needed to identify them.
A   Rockport, Texas, firefighter went door-to-door on Saturday   looking for people who may need help after Hurricane Harvey   passed through. Joe Raedle/Getty   Images
Harvey could cause up to $75 billion in damage, Enki Research estimated — and other projections are even higher .
The Category 4 storm Hurricane Ike, the most recent major   hurricane to hit the Texas Gulf Coast, caused $38 billion in   damage in 2008. When Hurricane Katrina ravaged New Orleans and   the Gulf Coast in 2005, it caused over $100 billion in damage.
Why Harvey's hurricane category didn't tell the full story
Evacuees   wade down a flooded section of Interstate 610 in Houston as   floodwaters rise on Sunday. AP   Photo/David J. Phillip
Hal   Needham , a hurricane scientist at Louisiana State University,   wrote in a blog post on the weather site WXshift that a storm's   category doesn't fully convey how dangerous rainfall could be and   how much damage it could cause.
"Hurricanes and tropical storms throw three hazards at us: wind,   rainfall, and storm surge," he wrote. "Think of the impacts   separately. Storms with weaker winds are more likely to stall and   dump heavier rainfall. This shocks people, as it would seem   intuitive that a Category 5 hurricane would tend to dump more   rain than a Category 1 hurricane. But the opposite is true."
While strong winds can rip shingles off roofs and tear down power   lines, flooding often causes more widespread, costlier damage —   and can be more dangerous for humans. The scale used to distinguish a hurricane from a tropical storm is based solely on maximum sustained wind, but Needham explained   that "storms are too complex to define by one number."
Ana Pelisson/Business Insider
Trump's 'first serious' crisis
Hurricane Harvey is Donald Trump's "first serious" crisis from a natural disaster as president.   He flew to Corpus Christi Tuesday morning with first lady Melania   Trump to survey the damage and relief efforts, and made a stop in   Austin to attend a briefing on emergency operations from Texas   leadership.
"We want to do it better than ever before. We want to be looked   at in five years, in 10 years from now as, this is the way to do   it," Trump said at a press conference alongside Texas Gov. Greg   Abbott. "This was of epic proportion. Nobody's ever seen anything   like this."
President   Donald Trump, flanked by Texas Gov. Greg Abbott and first lady   Melania Trump speaks during a briefing on Harvey relief efforts,   Tuesday, Aug. 29, 2017, at Firehouse 5 in Corpus Christi,   Texas. AP   Photo/Evan Vucci
How Texas and Louisiana prepared
Thousands of Texas residents, many in the towns of Port Aransas,   Port O'Connor, and Corpus Christi, near where the hurricane first   made landfall, evacuated before the storm. The Corpus Christi   Regional Transportation Authority began busing evacuees to San   Antonio on Thursday.
Houston didn't order evacuations before the storm hit , and   only issued orders in some areas of Harris County on Monday and   Tuesday. Jeff   Masters , a meteorologist at The Weather Company who cofounded   the weather-data website Weather Underground, recommended   evacuating only if local emergency experts said to do so. Many of   the deaths during Hurricane Rita in 2005 occurred as people tried   to evacuate.
Residents   wade through floodwaters from Tropical Storm Harvey in Beaumont   Place, Houston on August 28, 2017. Jonathan   Bachman/Reuters
Abbott declared a state of disaster August 23 for 30 Texas counties ,   then added 20 counties to that declaration on Saturday and another four on Sunday, freeing up state money and resources   to respond to the storm.
He also issued a federal disaster declaration in 33 counties, which Trump approved. Trump has approved   emergency disaster declarations in both Texas and Louisiana,   directing federal aid toward the affected areas.
On Monday morning, Abbott activated the entire Texas National Guard of 12,000 people,   and increased the number deployed to 24,000 National Guard troops on Thursday.
Before the storm hit, the American Red Cross opened pop-up shelters throughout Houston and San Antonio.   Dallas opened shelters as well, and Mayor Mike Rawlings invited   those stranded to seek refuge in a press conference Tuesday   morning.
Turner, Houston's mayor, said Tuesday that more than 9,000 people   were seeking shelter at the George R. Brown Convention Center,   the largest shelter that has been opened so far. It has a   5,000-cot capacity.
People   sleep on the floor at the George R. Brown Convention Center that   has been set up as a shelter for evacuees escaping the   floodwaters from Tropical Storm Harvey in Houston, Texas,   Tuesday, Aug. 29, 2017. Associated   Press/LM Otero
The Health and Human Services Department deployed   assets to Texas and Louisiana ahead of Harvey's landfall ,   moving six teams of emergency medical responders to the Dallas   area as well as teams to support medical personnel in both   states.
FEMA   said it readied over 4.6 million meals, more than 5.1 million   liters of water, and 15,000 federal staff members for the storm   response.
Long, the FEMA administrator, recommended that people seeking to   help those affected by the storm donate to an organization on the site www.nvoad.org .
