Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
The crew from the sailing school vessel Tole Mour and Catalina Island Marine Institute instructors hold an 18-foot-long Oarfish that was found in the waters of Toyon Bay on Oct. 12 on Santa Catalina Island, Calif. 
Catalina Island Marine Institute via AP
A Bathysaurus swims in the Weatch Canyon off Nantucket on Aug. 7. The fish uses its lower jaw to scoop food out of the sand. 
NOAA via AP
Caleb Newton displays the jaws of his record 7-pound 6-ounce Northern Snakehead he caught in Aquia Creek on June 3 in Fredricksburg, Va. 
Griffin Moores, The Free Lance-Star, via AP
A person displays a giant eyeball from a mysterious sea creature that washed ashore on Oct. 11, 2012, in Pompano Beach, Fla. No one knows what species the huge blue eyeball came from. 
Carli Segelson, Florida Fish and Wildlife Commissiion, via AP
Pepople watch a whale shark on March 6, 2012, at the Georgia Aquarium in Atlanta.  The whale shark is the world's largest fish species. 
Don Emmert, AFP/Getty Images
A deep-sea Chimaera, a relative of the shark, is photographed by a deep sea probe during the Okeanos Explorer Program on Aug. 26, 2010, off Indonesia. 
NOAA via AP
Men work around a rare megamouth shark on March 30, 2009, in Donsol town, Philippines.  Fishermen caught and ate the megamouth shark, one of the rarest fish in the world. 
Elson Aca, World Wildlife Fund, via AP
A ghost-like Sea Angel, platybrachium antarcticum, swims through the deep Antarctic waters on Feb. 14, 2009. 
Russ Hopcroft, University of Alaska Fairbanks, via AP
A journalist looks at a Coelacanth, a prehistoric fish that was thought to have become extinct 65 million years ago, at the Sant Ocean Hall at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History on Sept. 24, 2008, in Washington. 
Karen Bleier, AFP/Getty Images
Fullscreen
A Frill shark swims in a tank on Jan. 21, 2007, in Numazu, Japan. The shark, which was found by a fisherman, usually lives in extremely deep water. It's body shape and the number of gill are similar to fossils of sharks that lived billions of years ago. 
Awashima Marine Park via Getty Images
Researcher Tsunemi Kubodera displays a 24-foot-long giant squid aboard his research vessel on Dec. 4, 2006, off the Ogasawara Islands, Japan. 
Tsunemi Kubodera, National Science Museum, via AP
People display a 646-pound Mekong giant catfish on June 29, 2005, in Thailand. 
Suthep Kritsanavarin XXX NONE
A Leafy Sea Dragon swims in a tank at the Monterey Bay Aquarium on Nov. 20, 2003, in Monterey, Calif. The Leafy Sea Dragon is member of the seahorse family and is found in southern and western Australia. 
Randy Wilder, Monterey Bay Aquarium
Like this topic? You may also like these photo galleries:
Replay
