Aug. 31, 2017 at 9:27 p.m.
Updated Aug. 31, 2017 at 9:27 p.m.
When Harvey made landfall along the mid Texas coast, it grew rapidly from a tropical depression to a major hurricane in less than 36 hours.
Harvey was born on Aug. 13 when a tropical wave came off the west coast of Africa and emerged with an area of low pressure near the Cabo Verde Islands, according to a National Weather Service summary.
By Aug. 17 the National Hurricane Center issued tropical storm warnings. By the next day, Harvey impacted the Windward Islands entering the Easter Caribbean Sea as a minimal tropical storm and weakened to a topical wave late Aug. 19.
The remnants of Harvey failed to form as a tropical cyclone as it moved into the Yucatan Peninsula Aug. 22.
At 10 a.m. Aug. 23 Harvey had formed into a tropical depression. Later in the day, Harvey formed into a tropical storm. With wind shear in the Western Gulf of Mexico weakening, Harvey intensified quickly. By that night, Harvey was forecast to make landfall somewhere overnight Aug. 25 or next morning.
On Aug. 24. Harvey’s impact on the middle and upper Texas Coast certainly seem devastating to meteorologists. Harvey was projected to make landfall as a major hurricane, Category 3 or higher, on the night of Aug. 25. They projected once the storm moved inland it would stall and meander over south or southeast Texas for days producing devastating winds and heavy, excessive rainfall.
Harvey intensified quickly becoming a Category 3 Hurricane at 2 p.m. Aug. 25. The eye of the hurricane first made landfall on San Jose Island and then near Rockport area around 10 p.m. that day.
Corpus Christi experienced strong and damaging wind gusts. The city’s international airport recorded gusts up to 63 mph before it went offline. The Victoria RAWS station had a peak gust of 83 mph. Much higher wind gusts occurred in Corpus Christi.
Rockport and Fulton were hit hardest by the storm as they underwent a direct hit from Harvey’s eyewall. Many structures, homes and businesses were damaged or destroyed as roofs blew off and walls collapsed. Electricity and water services were lost. The city's infrastructure was crippled.
Significant structural damage also occurred in Port Lavaca, Copano Village and Aransas Pass. Tens of thousands of South Texas residents and businesses lost power for days, with the hardest hit areas likely losing power for several weeks.
Harvey’s storm surge brought major increased water and tide levels over the Texas Coast. The highest maximum storm tides were observed in Port Lavaca at 7.63 feet. Other places across South Texas including Seadrift, Port O'Connor, Aransas Wildlife Refuge, Copano Bay, Port Aransas, and Bob Hall Pier saw tide levels from 3 to 6 feet.
Harvey is unique because instead of moving inland and farther away from the coast, the storm stalled over south and southeast Texas for days, producing catastrophic devastating and deadly flash and river flooding. Southeast Texas took on the brunt of the heavy rainfall, with some areas receiving more than 40 inches of rain in less than 48 hours. Cedar Bayou in Houston received a storm total of 51.88 inches of rainfall, which is a new North American record.
South Texas residents weren’t spared from the flooding impact from Harvey. Several flash flood warning were issued on Aug. 25 and 26. By Aug. 27, 15 to 25 inch storm total 72-hour rainfall amounts were seen over much of Aransas and Refugio Counties, as well as portions of San Patricio and Victoria counties.
The excessive rainfall resulted in major river flooding over the Guadalupe River and the Garcitas and Coleto creeks. Near major flooding was observed on the Copano Creek near Refugio, with moderate flooding on the Mission River.
After causing deadly and damaging winds and floods to south Texas, and catastrophic, historical, devastating, and life-threatening flooding over southeast Texas, Harvey made its final landfall near Cameron, La. overnight on Wednesday. More heavy rainfall and flooding occurred over the Northern Gulf States on its final landfall. South Texas residents who experienced Harvey will long remember the storm and, unfortunately many other residents will take a long time to recover from this historic and unusual tropical system.
SHARE
