Sept. 2, 2017 at 9:27 p.m.
Updated Sept. 3, 2017 at 6 a.m.
Mold grows on the wall of Braelynn Perez's bedroom, which was destroyed when the wall fell in because of Hurricane Harvey.   Olivia Vanni                                                                                                                                                for The Victoria Advocate
ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS
For more information about how to get financial relief:
Visit the Prosperity Bank website about how to get unemployment assistance at prosperitybankusa.com .
Visit Texas Workforce Commission at twc.state.tx.us/jobseekers/disaster-unemployment-assistance.
Visit University of Houston legal website at peopleslawyer.net or call 713-743-2168 for useful information to assist with problems arising out of Hurricane Harvey.
If area stores had not run out of generators, Ray Perez, 35, and his family of five wouldn't have evacuated his three-bedroom apartment that is now uninhabitable.
Monday, Perez and his family returned from San Antonio to Autumn Park Apartments, 4405 N. Navarro St. There, he stood on the sidewalk and could see inside his 9-year-old daughter's bedroom.
"It woke me up and hit me hard because we were going to stay," Perez said.
The destruction forced his family to move to an upstairs one-bedroom apartment that is not handicap-accessible for their 4-year-old daughter, who has cerebral palsy and epilepsy.
"We spoke to the manager, who said we will be allowed to move out and break the lease, but it's still unclear about when we will be able to stay in a temporary apartment that is big enough for us," Perez said.
With no work and severe damage to their homes and businesses, some Crossroads families are facing a financial strain.
Perez said that after FEMA looked at the structure and mold damage, it will take up to 10 days for them to figure out what they can do next.
"We just want to get back to where we were in our lives," said his wife, Debra Perez, 36.
Several solutions are becoming available for those in need of financial support.
John Zacek, chairman for the South Texas area of Prosperity Bank, said they are finalizing a program designed to help families who are in a crisis.
"We will be offering our customers a loan payment extension for up to 60 days and a $500 maximum loan for qualifying individuals with fairly minimal qualifying requirements," Zacek said.
As a way to get cash fast, Zacek said, qualifications will be relaxed to allow the bank to help people who are really in need.
"It's our way as a bank to try to help families in need," Zacek said.
The low-interest loans will be available online and on site at any of their locations starting Tuesday with a fast application process to get cash fast for customers and non-customers.
"We will be able to offer this product on a remote basis and are working on setting up a mobile banking facility in Rockport to facilitate cash needs," Zacek said.
After Geronima Rivera, 43, heard  her husband and her son will be out of work for the next few weeks, she looked into the disaster unemployment application at the Texas Workforce Commission.
"I went online and placed the application Monday evening, and my husband was approved the next day," Rivera said.
The process in applying requires basic information, proper paperwork of employment and details of why the applicant is unable to work.
Rivera said her husband will receive a check that covers half of what he makes by next week.
"It's something to keep us going," Rivera said.
After dealing with everything that has happened in the last week, Rivera sees this as a good sign  that things will start to look up.
"Any little bit of help that anyone can get," Rivera said, "it's a blessing."
RELATED
