Save
KARNES COUNTY – Mother Nature is unpredictable. The so-called weather experts can only do so much when it comes to predicting the weather.
Well that unpredictability turned out to be good for those in and around Karnes County this past weekend as Hurricane Harvey, which slammed onshore as a category four storm near Rockport late Friday night, made a slight turn to the northeast, sparing this part of Southeast Texas from major damage.
“It was a long day and night with Hurricane Harvey. The county, I feel, fared well considering the what if,” said Karnes County Emergency Management Coordinator and Commissioner Shelby Dupnik. “It could have been much worse for us as they were predicting, but we were prepared.”
The storm, which did produce rainfall totals between three and 10 inches throughout the county and wind gusts in excess of 50 miles per hour, did have some effects on those in and around Karnes County, but nothing near what others got along the coast and in the Houston area.
Power outages were reported all around the county as some trees and branches caused power lines to come down. There were also reports of some minor flooding.
Most Karnes County residents stayed in their homes during this weather event, but a few evacuated to other places. Here are some of their responses to what transpired over the weekend:
James Ratcliff, Falls City — “Out here in Falls City, it appears we escaped the worst of Harvey’s wrath. Only a few tree branches and shingles fell around the apartments here, but that’s nothing compared to what I’ve seen around social media. So much devastation and loss. I’ve had a hard time processing it, quite frankly. My thoughts are with all those affected.”
Kathryn Baker Farris, Sugarland — “I was super worried about my home in Kenedy. Thanks to my awesome neighbors, Janet and Brett McDonald and Marsha Kolinek Duniven, they put sandbags at my doors and were my eyes during the storm. Still riding it out here in Sugar Land, but thankful my home is safe.”
Bridgit DeLeon Hernandez — “We stayed home and rode out the hurricane in Kenedy. It was difficult not having power for a while with three kids, but we managed. My husband works for TxDOT in Beeville and he was gone the whole time helping keep roadways clear.”
Shai Jonas — “Our family of four chose to stay in Kenedy and ride it out. Was difficult and very scary as we went without electricity for 24 hours and have two children, ages seven and 11. We had to put sandbags by our wall and front door at the apartment because water comes in. Was just all in all, a terrible experience, but glad we made it through safe together with God.”
Sandy De La Garza — “We boarded up and took our two girls and went far south to stay with family. Our street was out of power for a day and our water is still under a boil notice. Our neighbors, friends and Facebook kept us informed of the status of things back home.”
Rose Elizondo Sanchez — “I’m originally from Runge, but my daughter and I have been living in Goliad for a little over a year now. We stayed home. We were without power and water since midnight Friday night. The electricity was restored Monday afternoon, but we still don’t know how much longer we’ll be without water. We had some structural damage and had a lot of trees and power lines/poles that were down. Everything here in Goliad has been closed, but hopefully we’ll have a store open up soon.”
Monica Barrientez Gonzales — “We rode out the storm in our home in Karnes City. We lost power Saturday morning at 4 a.m. and was without power until Sunday afternoon at 3:30 p.m.”
Rosa Cavazos — Rain was heavy and the winds were gusting all night long in Panna Maria. Wind chimes sang throughout the night and day.”
Cecilia Nichole Villanueva — “We boarded our house in hopes of riding out the storm, but due to the storm becoming stronger, we decided last minute to evacuate to the other side of San Antonio. I know our community was without power and water was not safe to use. Returning back home, we had some tree limbs on the ground and quite a few of our shingles flew off the roof. I’m just glad to come home to our house safe and our friends and family doing well.”
Sandy Villarreal — “We stayed in Runge. There were five of us adults and a 13-month old. We were well prepared, but thankfully kept power the entire time. Lots of huge limbs down and a piece of tin roof was beginning to blow off. Many blessings here, but worried about family and friends in other areas.”
Janet Wells — “We decided to evacuate and went way northeast to my daughters in Woodville. All the outer bands of rain got us up there and it could have been worse in Kenedy. We were safe, even with all the rain up there, which was three days straight. The tank behind my daughter’s house has risen, but when it tops out it flows into the woods. Except for the rain, the family time was great.”
Dewayne Jaramillo — “Part of the roof from our place in Portland caved in and we lost it all. We rode out the storm and are now staying with family here in Karnes City. Never again will we ride out a storm in 165 mph winds. Never.”
Leticia Fabiola Cruces — “We live in Karnes City and decided to evacuated. We left Friday around noon time right when the wind and clouds started to roll in to town. I had been watching the news all night and keeping posted by all the weather apps. It was a hard decision to leave, but we started packing in preparation Thursday in case things looked bad. We packed clothes, hygiene products, ice chest with food, cases of bottled waters, pictures, baby books and important documents. We had no idea what we would be coming back to. Our family of four and our family pet, Zoey, loaded up and headed west. Our plan was to try to head in land away from the coast so we headed towards Pearsall/Uvalde. We didn’t think we would have such a hard time finding a place to stay. We visited about ten different motels/hotels and all were either booked or not pet friendly. We ended up traveling towards San Antonio and finally found a place to stay. When we checked in the first night, we didn’t know for how long we would be staying so we paid for one night, which ended up turning in to two nights. We had the necessities such as food, running water, light and a roof over our head. We watched in disbelief as Hurricane Harvey turned from CAT2 to CAT4 with the most unpredictable path. All I could do was keep updating my Facebook with updates and alerts for anyone who didn’t know what was going on. We did get some strong winds and rain, but nothing horrible. We returned on Sunday to find our house intact and no harm done. I do not regret leaving when we did because it definitely could have been a lot worse.”
Melissa Sauceda Cerda — “We evacuated to be safe. Worst thing was our neighbor’s tree fell over and almost landed on my daughter’s room. I’m saddened by all those that went through more as we have friends and family in Victoria and Houston and my son evacuated to come stay with us since he lives in Corpus Christi. He had damage to his fence, but that’s all we know.”
“Here in Runge, we still have pockets of power outages, trees down and roof damage to some structures,” said Runge Mayor Homer Lott. “We are still on alert.”
New city manager of Karnes City, Robert Evans, said that his city took all the steps possible in order to best respond to any event that Harvey may have posed.
“When the forecast showed that it was coming this way, we had all equipment tested and fuel topped off in all the city vehicles, we updated our manning rotation schedules and surged personnel in order to reduce response time for emergencies, we participated with the county and state agencies in synchronizing the messages to the public and we continually monitored the weather situation and disseminated needed information,” noted Evans. “As far as damage goes, we did not sustain any public flood damage. We will continue to receive individual citizen reports of damage.”
Evans did report that Karnes City had a situation where electricity did have to be re-established at its water plant.
“We never were completely without electricity there, but for a short time, we did not have the necessary amount and type to maintain the flow up into the tower,” said Evans. “We will end up needing a new pump as one of the three pumps became inoperative. We have a spare on hand at all times and we will need to replace that one as soon as possible as well.”
As of press time, there were no road closures inside the city limits of Karnes City and power was never completely lost in Karnes City, with the exception of a couple of small areas that lost power Saturday morning and were out for almost two days.
 As of press time, there was still an advisory out for any Kenedy residents and businesses to boil water as AEP was still working to restore power to the water plant.
“Crews were continuing to remove debris from city streets and easements on Monday and we’re just asking for residents to be patient,” said Kenedy City Manager Barbara Shaw. “And we’re asking for people to not mess with trees or branches that are on wires.”
Kenedy residents and businesses owners can call Anthony Foley at 830-477-1131 to report any trees and/or branches that are down.
El Oso Water Supply Corporation sent out a message stating that all of its customers could drink the water.
“We prepared for the storm to ensure that we would have power by having backup generators at our major facilities,” said an El Oso representative.
Most school districts were shut down on Friday and remained closed on Monday, with the exception of Falls City, which opened it’s doors back up on Monday after being shut down on Friday.
“Our district received no damage to any of our buildings or structures with the exception to a few minor oak limbs that were broke,” said Falls City ISD Superintendent Todd Pawelek. “We are planning on having a normal week of school and look forward to hosting our first football game at the end of the week.”
“We would like to thank all of the Karnes County Emergency Management personnel for keeping us informed and protected throughout the storm,” added Pawelek. “We are also appreciative of our staff, students and parents for being flexible as we were making adjustments to our school day.  Our thoughts and prayers go out to all of those who have been and continue to be impacted by Hurricane Harvey.”
Kenedy ISD resumed normal operations on Tuesday, Aug. 29 with all classes and extracurricular activities commencing at the regularly scheduled times.
“Our district fared well. We had some minor roof leaks that were reported due to heavy wind and we have made adjustments due to the boil order issued by the City of Kenedy,” said Kenedy ISD Superintendent Travis McClellan. “We were also the staging area on Saturday afternoon for Kenedy residents under the voluntary evacuation directed by the National Guard, in conjunction with the Karnes County Sheriff’s Office, the City of Kenedy, DPS and Kenedy PD.” ​​
In response to the water boil notice, Kenedy ISD has implemented the following actions in compliance with the notice and these actions shall remain in place until further guidance is issued by the City of Kenedy.:
• KISD will supply each classroom with hand sanitizer for student use .
• Additional bottled water stations shall replace the use of water fountains and potable water in cafeteria serving lines.
• All meal preparation shall use bottled water from an approved water source.
Runge ISD Superintendent Dr. Bake Barron said that his campus had minimal wind damage to the roof and says his district’s first day of school would be Wednesday, Aug. 30.
“Our guiding principle was student and staff safety. We felt it would be best to close the campuses Friday and Monday,” Barron said. “Tuesday is a teacher work day. We did not want teachers or students to be put in harms way.’
“Thanks to Karnes County Sheriff Dwayne Villanueva and Chief Deputy Robert Ebrom for their hard work and coordinated efforts throughout this situation,” noted Dupnik. “I’d also like to send a special thanks to the Karnes County Road and Bridge Department, Commissioner James Rosales, TxDOTs Danny Kelly and Kevin Butler and their staff, city administrators, public works, police departments, fire departments, Karnes County EMS, local school districts, Otto Kaiser Memorial Hospital and all the local nursing homes.”
“Kudos also to the power companies, AEP and Karnes Electric, who have a hard job trying to restore power and reminding us about downed power lines and to treat them all as live power lines,” continued Dupnik. “A lot of events were taking place behind the scenes to keep our response ongoing. The sheriff’s staff answering phones. The county attorney, Jennifer Dillingham, and Mary Lozano for doing what ever was needed for the Emergency Operation Center to continue to function. Thanks to all the elected officials for their support.”
“I guess times have changed on how we use to do things, but the main focus was safety of local residents and first responders,” added Dupnik. “So a heart filled sense of gratitude and respect to all that made it happen. Thanks again.”
NOTE: The Falls City VFD is looking for pledges for funds to purchase five-gallon cans to fill them with fuel and take them to Rockport for resident to use in their generators. For more information, contact Falls City VFD Fire Chief Raymond Dzuik at 835-583-6562.
