County evacuates 54 for Harvey, while others stayed
By MELONY OVERTON
Email
Robert Rubio, with Calhoun County Independent School District, left, and . Lieutenant Juan Luna of the Port Lavaca Fire Department, left, helped Arnulfo Morales, of Seadrift, onto a CCISD bus Friday as Calhoun County Emergency Management evacuated 54 people to a shelter in New Braunfels. (Melony Overton/Wave)
Tom Slater, of Magnolia Beach, sat with three of his five dogs he brought with him to the Bauer Community Center Friday morning to escape Hurricane Harvey. Calhoun County Emergency Management evacuated 54 people to a shelter at middle school in New Braunfels. (Melony Overton/Wave photo)
Barbara Smith, of Seadrift, who is deaf, signed "I love you" to her pet "Nikki" Friday at the Bauer Community Center as she waited to evacuate to shelter in New Braunfels to escape Hurricane Harvey. Calhoun County Emergency Management evacuated 54 people. (Melony Overton/Wave photo)
Save
Days after Harvey made landfall on the Texas Coast, Lynn Reeves will never forget the deafening sound of the Category 4 hurricane.
"The whole thing was scary. It was hard to hear those 130 mph winds howling and battering leaves against the house. That is the scariest noise I've ever heard," Reeves said from her home in Long Mott, her only shelter from the storm.
"We stayed because we have too many pets, no money and no other options," Reeves said Sunday.
"Trees are down. The roof is damaged. I don't have any standing water in my house. We have no internet, no power and cell service is spotty. It could always be worse," Reeves said. "Just keep praying for us. The flood water is slowly receding, but this stuff ain't over yet."
Reeves said she had food, a freezer and a refrigerator ran by a generator that is also kept fans going, but it was a sweltering 83 degrees in her home.
"Neighbors are bringing food to us to keep in the freezer, but I'm running out of room. We have a propane and coal barbecue pits. We are set for cooking, but we haven't used them yet," Reeves said. "We have some bottled water, but not enough."
Reeve's partner made a trip to Yoakum for gasoline and to buy a gallon of milk at H-E-B.
"He said the shelves were wiped out," she said.
Through it all, Reeves has tried to maintain a positive attitude.
"All you can do is laugh. If you don't, you will cry, and you won't stop crying," she said.
Yvette Whitaker also stayed in her home in Long Mott for the hurricane, a decision she regrets.
"We really didn't think it was going to be this bad. It started as a Category 1 and we said to ourselves that we will just get wind and a little rain. We were wrong. It turned into a Category 4, and I was kicking myself saying, 'We should have left," Whitaker said.
When the winds escalated, Whitaker said she could feel her mobile home shake.
"I sat on the floor in the hallway praying and crying," she said.
Whitaker recalled one frightening moment after she had heard that a tornado had touched down in Seadrift.
"I was on high alert. When my trailer started shaking, that's when I thought a tornado was coming because I have never been through one," she said.
Whitaker said staying during Harvey was a lesson she will not soon forget.
"I will never test another hurricane because you never know what will happen next. It could be a category 1 then when it hits it could be a Category 5. So when they say evacuate, I am leaving," she said.
Mandatory evacuation
Early Friday morning, evacuees gathered inside the Bauer Community Center with family, a bag of belongings and some with their pets in carriers as they waited to board two Calhoun County Independent School District buses in order to be taken to a shelter at Churchill Middle School in New Braunfels.
City of Port Lavaca officials, the Port Lavaca Police Department, Port Lavaca Fire Department and the Calhoun County Sheriff's Office greeted evacuees at the entrance of the center as rain fell and winds began to pick up.
Benjamin Hubbard, who has lived in a mobile home in Port Lavaca since 2008, decided to evacuate to stay safe.
"I evacuated to San Antonio during (Hurricane) Ike. I stayed awhile in a shelter there. I may have to stay for a few days this time," he said.
Hubbard said he did not have any fears leaving Port Lavaca for the shelter.
"It's very nice that the county is providing this service. It's a good feeling to get on a bus than having to follow thousands of cars all trying to get out at once, and you run out of gas," he said.
Tyanna Barefoot and Bonnie Welsh, both of Port Lavaca, said they wanted to stay at their apartments and weather the storm.
"We were both planning on staying, but it scared us when they said that it was coming toward us," said Welsh, who has lived in Port Lavaca four years. "We were going to be on the east side of it. I have a daughter who lives in Port Aransas who left yesterday. She tried to get me to go with her, but I wanted to stay."
Barefoot, who has lived in Port Lavaca 30 years, said she always evacuated with family. This was her first time to go to a shelter.
"My daughter lives in Virginia. She called emergency management here, and told them where I was at because I told her I was going to stay," Barefoot said. "I stayed through (Hurricane) Claudette and that was bad. They were saying Harvey was going to be a Category 3 and Claudette was supposedly just a Category 1. It took part of our roof off. We lived down at Alamo Beach. I don't want to go through something like that again."
"I think it's going to be like camping out," Welsh said about staying at a shelter.
"What I have heard so far is it's going to be a gymnasium where they put out cots," Barefoot said. "That's it. We were talking what will we do for coffee?"
Welsh said she was worried about her apartment.
"I live on the ground floor, and it might flood," she said.
Barefoot applauded the county for providing a means to evacuate.
"They came and got me, and waited on me while I got my stuff together," she said. "They helped me take my stuff down the stairs."
Barbara Smith, of Seadrift, who is deaf, signed "I love you" to her terrier "Nikki" as she waited to board a bus to the shelter.
"I have lived here all my life, and this is my first time to go to a shelter because my family is gone, either passed away or moved," Smith said as she signed "Be good" to Nikki, who was in a pet carrier. "I just want to go home when the storm is gone."
Smith remembers leaving a pet at home during a previous evacuation, but she could not bear to leave Nikki behind, she said as tears welled in her eyes.
"She is like family. If I left her to die, or drown in the water....I don't want to lose her. I have love for her in my heart," she said.
Mayor Jack Whitlow was among city officials at the Bauer who greeted evacuees as they came inside.
"It's going to get nasty. We have to get people out of here," Whitlow said. "Most people have left. There will be 25 percent who stay. They are on their own. It is dangerous for them. The elderly and children should get out of town. During the storm, we can provide nothing. If you get hurt during the storm while you are here, you can't get help until the storm subsides. It is going to be bad through Monday morning with wind. We can't send our crews out until it is safe. Everyone is scared of this on because of all the rain we will get."
Whitlow said the City had a skeleton crew of law enforcement bunkered down to prevent looting.
"We will have a large contingent to make sure the town is secure because of the evacuation," he said. "The County is, too. We have the greatest law enforcement crews around. That applies to fire, EMS, law enforcement who are working so hard. The volunteer fire departments have been out surveying their area making sure the sick, the elderly get out, and that ones who are on the beaches get out. Everybody is working together."
"This has been really great. The county judge, commissioners, and emergency management have been wonderful coordinating everything. That's what you need at a time like this," he said.
Mary Orta, assistant to the Calhoun County Emergency Management director, said 54 people were evacuated to New Braunfels.
"We will bring them back once the threat has lifted," Orta said.
Once Calhoun County Commissioners declared a mandatory evacuation Thursday morning, RVs and vehicles towing boats and trailers filled with belongings traveled down Highway 238/316 out of Magnolia Beach, Alamo Beach, Indianola and Port O'Connor.
Annette McFarlin, of Indianola, began evacuating truckloads of domestic, farm and exotic animals to her son's ranch in Kenedy in Karnes County when Harvey was a tropical storm.
"We will be staying in oilfield housing, but at least we will have a roof over our head, and the animals will be safe," McFarlin said.
McFarlin owns pigs, a Nubian Ibex, a Transcaspian Urial, 10 dogs, two miniature horses, a miniature donkey, chickens, ducks, geese, .alpacas, two kangaroos, a lemur, two Patagonian cavy and four coatimundis.
"The animals know something is up," McFarlin said Friday. "They get antsy."
Her kangaroos Luke and Lilly, who are on the bottle, let McFarlin and her hired hand Dave Brady hold them. Za-Za, the lemur, nervously pulled his long, ringed tail through both hands continuously.
"We have to prepare to stay somewhere else. I will be lucky to have a home when we get back. We used to panic and pull everything out, but I am not worried about the home. It is insured," McFarlin said. "We will have to leave the chickens and ducks because we have no way to transport them. They can usually get up out of the water. We have barns they can get into."
McFarlin expected the animal transports to take two days. She also transported animals for her neighbors.
By Monday, McFarlin was ready to return to Indianola with the animals.
"We are waiting to get water and electricity back on before we do. No word on when that will be. We do know our house is good on the inside with debris outside an lots of fences are down. We were blessed," she said.
