Save
KARNES COUNTY — Residents of Karnes County spent much of Wednesday and Thursday preparing for Hurricane Harvey, which rapidly intensified and is expected to make landfall on the central Texas coast sometime on Friday night or early Saturday morning.
Emergency management officials have scheduled a meeting for 9 a.m. on Friday at the Karnes County sheriff's office and commissioner Shelby Dupnik, who is the county's emergency management coordinator, said he would relay as much information as he could to all media sources to get the word out to the public.
"We're going to be on top of this and have already put some things into motion so as to be prepared for whatever happens," Dupnik said. "The safety of our citizens is our priority and keeping the county and city governments operational during times like these are crucial."
Due to the storm, Karnes County school districts have canceled classes.
Kenedy ISD and Runge ISD will be shut down on Friday, Aug. 25 and Monday, Aug. 28 while Karnes City and Falls City have canceled classes for just Friday at this point.
“The forecast for our area appears to be a typical rain and wind event, enabling our students to safely attend school all day on Friday, however, the prediction for Saturday, Sunday and Monday indicates severe weather and probable flooding,” said Karnes City ISD Superintendent Jeanette Winn. “In order to give our employees and parents adequate time to prepare for the weekend’s weather uncertainties, KCISD will cancel all classes on Friday, Aug. 25.”
“Regarding school operations on Monday, stay tuned to updates on the KCISD website, Facebook page and Twitter page. Above all, please be safe this weekend,” added Winn.
Runge ISD Superintendent Bake Barron noted that Tuesday, Aug. 29 would be a teacher work day and that the official first day of school would now be Wednesday, Aug. 30.
“If we have to change the schedule we will notify the community via phone calls, social media and the marquee,” Barron said.
Falls City ISD Superintendent Todd Pawelek advises students, parents and faculty to continue to visit the FCISD website and Facebook page for the latest information regarding possible delays and/or cancelations for next week.
Both Karnes County and DeWitt County were placed under a hurricane warning while Atascosa, Bastrop, Bexar, Caldwell, Fayette, Gonzales, Guadalupe, Lavaca and Wilson were all placed under a tropical storm warning.
A hurricane warning means that hurricane conditions are expected somewhere within the warning area. A warning is typically issued 36 hours before the anticipated first occurrence of tropical storm force winds, conditions that make outside preparations difficult or dangerous. Preparations to protect life and property should be rushed to completion.
At 4 p.m., the eye of Hurricane Harvey was located near latitude 24.7 north, longitude 93.9 west and is moving toward the north-northwest near 10 miles per hour (mph). A turn toward the northwest is expected this evening, and Harvey’s forward speed is forecast to slow down during the next couple of days.
On the forecast track, Harvey will approach the middle Texas coast on Friday and make landfall Friday night or early Saturday. Harvey is then likely to stall near or just inland of the middle Texas coast through the weekend.
Maximum sustained winds are near 85 mph with higher gusts. Strengthening is forecast and Harvey is expected to become a major hurricane, possibly a strong Category 3 storm, by Friday before it reaches the middle Texas coast.
Hurricane-force winds extend outward up to 25 miles from the center, and tropical-storm-force winds extend outward up to 90 miles. The minimum central pressure, based on dropsonde data released by a NOAA hurricane hunter aircraft, is 976 mb (28.82 inches).
Stay tuned to the Karnes Countywide website and Facebook page for more updated news as Hurricane Harvey approaches.
