Tropical Storm Harvey may bring heavy rains
Wednesday
Aug 23, 2017 at 5:03 PM Aug 23, 2017 at 5:28 PM
Ofelia Garcia Hunterohunter@aliceechonews.com
Jim Wells and Nueces county along with City of Alice and Corpus Christi staff monitored a several conference calls Wednesday with the National Weather Service.
John Metz with the National Weather Service warns residents to get prepared in case of heavy rainfall.
"Only minimal changes has occurred," he said of Tropical Storm Harvey, which remains stationary. "Rainfall is going to be the main problem."
Rains could begin in the Coastal Bend area sometime Friday afternoon.
"Arrival of outer bands," Metz said in conference call.
Jim Wells County had another conference call Wednesday afternoon and is expected to have another one at 10:15 p.m.
"All of our residents should be prepared for heavy rain," JWC County Judge Pete Trevino said. "We are working on a plan of action of what to do if it does get worse."
County Judge Loyd Neal also called a meeting Wednesday afternoon with key Emergency Operation Center staff.
Tropical Depression Harvey has reformed in the Gulf of Mexico with a Northwest track to the Texas Coast. Hurricane Watch is now in effect from Baffin Bay to San Luis Pass, and Storm Surge Watch now in effect from Baffin Bay to High Island. Tropical Storm Force Winds and surge impacts are expected to begin Friday with landfall along the mid Coast Friday Night.
Heavy rainfall and flooding will be the primary concern as the system is expected to stall across the area through the weekend.
"Nueces County residents in low lying areas subject to flooding must take immediate precautions to plan for such rainfall and flooding," Neal said in a press release.
Rainfall totals of 6 to 12 inches with isolated amounts of 20 inches possible all mainly east of Interstate 37.
Area residents should be cautious of potential rural and urban flooding and hazardous driving conditions. Above normal tides on area beaches will cause extremely dangerous rip currents. Beachgoers should check conditions prior to going to area beaches.
Area residents are asked to take necessary precautions to protect lives and secure property. Nueces County will continue to monitor weather conditions will make operational decisions to protect life and preserve property.
Stay Informed. Sign up for emergency notifications at www.ReverseAlert.org. Residents can also “Like” Nueces County Office of Emergency Management on Facebook or follow them on Twitter @NuecesOEM.
The City of Alice, which included the Alice school district and city staff met at the council chambers.
"We are monitoring the situation and we are making plans," said Fire Chief, the city emergency management coordinator. "We are preparing for worse-case scenario and hoping for best case scenario."
About Us
