A Twitter List by KHOU
9:17 p.m.: The City of Portland announced that they will discontinue water service due to a shortage in water delivery from the San Patricio Municipal Water District.
8:00 p.m.: Power to the O.N. Stevens Water Treatment Facility in Corpus Christi has been restored according to Mayor Joe McComb, and the City is hoping to expedite the process of recalling the water boil advisory.
McComb said the precautionary water boil advisory that the City was placed under Friday was due to a power outage at the facility. Once the facility is up and running, water testing will begin and they expect to have results in by Sunday.
The mayor said the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality would then have to sign off on the test results. He hopes to get that process expedited so that water can be restored as soon as possible.
6:20 p.m. - Deputies are blocking traffic from entering the city limits of Port Aransas, where residents are asked not to return because of damage and debris.
4:27 p.m.: President Donald Trump plans to visit the Coastal Bend area early next week, according to a tweet from Congressman Blake Farenthold. He also tweeted that he spoke to Vice President Mike Pence who promised that South Texas will see the help it needs.
In my call with @VP he said @realDonaldTrump plans on visiting our area early next week. #HurricaneHarvey
— Blake Farenthold (@farenthold) August 26, 2017
Just spoke on the phone with @VP who promised he and @realDonaldTrump will provide South Texas with the help we need #HurricaneHarvey
— Blake Farenthold (@farenthold) August 26, 2017
More than 1,300 members of the Texas Military Department's Army National Guard, Air National Guard and Texas State Guard have been activated to assist first responders at the direction of Gov. Greg Abbott, according to the Texas Military Department.
More than 2,000 are expected to respond within the next 24-48 hours and additional personnel will be on standby to help as needed.Officials said UH-60 Blackhawk, UH-72 Lakota and CH-47 Chinook air crews are on standby in Austin, San Antonio and Grand Prairie to help with emergency search and rescue, water rescues and evacuations.
2:50 p.m. - Aransas County Judge Bill Mills Jr. confirms one person is dead and 12-14 people are injured in Rockport . The one death is from a house fire, according to Mills.
2:35 p.m. - Corpus Christi Mayor Joe McComb says there's no "prohibition" preventing people from returning to the city. There might be downed utilities and other debris in the road, but McComb said no one will stop people from coming back.
In terms of power outages, 60 percent of the city is without power. 
McComb also said he's been told by the police chief there have been no reports of looting after the storm.
2:08 p.m. - Corpus Christi's H-E-B grocery on Alemeda/Robert has reopened
1:05 p.m. - "Turn around, don't drown. Don't risk your life," said Texas Gov. Gregg Abbott during a news conference, speaking of the flooding threat now Tropical Storm Harvey will bring to the state.
The governor has issued a disaster declaration for 60 counties -- 20 more than the previous declaration approved Friday by President Donald Trump. "It immediately triggers the implementation of FEMA, (their) assistance ... can begin the rebuilding process as soon as possible," Abbott said.
There are more than 1,300 service members activated to assist in clean-up efforts. Five-hundred more are expected later, Abbott said.
There are more than 338,000 outages across southeast Texas, and it could be several days before power is restored. The governor said wind speeds must decrease below a certain level before utility workers can safely respond. 
Eighty troopers are being dispatched to the Corpus Christi area to assist in law enforcement efforts.
12:48 p.m. - Harvey has been downgraded to a 70 mph tropical storm and additional weakening is expected the longer it remains over land, according to the National Hurricane Center's 1 p.m. advisory .
The storm is 45 miles west-northwest of Victoria, and it is moving slowly -- north-northwest at 2 mph.
Forecasters mostly now are turning their attention from the wind to very heavy rain as some areas could pick up more than 20 inches during the next few days.
12:32 p.m. - School districts are calling off classes next week. There will be no school Monday, Aug. 28, for students in the Gregory-Portland Independent School District.
The start of fall classes at Del Mar College also is canceled Monday.
12:10 p.m. - 3 News wants to help connect the community with open gas stations, stores and other businesses. What's open in your area? Let us know on Facebook.
11:50 a.m. - Lowe's Home Improvement in Corpus Christi on Airline Road is open with water, supplies and wood.
11:36 a.m. - First photos show damage at Rockport Fulton High School. Click here to see photos of the high school and First Baptist Church in Rockport. 
This used to be the gymnasium at Rockport Fulton High School #hurricaneharvey #khou11 pic.twitter.c om/vjUwswPmkF
— Noel Brennan (@Noeltbrennan) August 26, 2017
11:27 a.m. - Charles Bujan, the mayor of Port Aransas, ask people not to return given the extensive damage . There are search and rescue operations underway, and "we don't need people to hinder us in that regard," Bujan said. Click to watch Mayor Bujan's update.
Pioneer Trailer Park is a "100-percent loss," Bujan said.
11:15 a.m. - Taft residents connected to the city's water system are asked to boil their water before use as a precaution.
10:57 a.m. - CCRTA has suspended all service until further notice. Will resume service when roads are clear.
10:41 a.m. - The highest wind gust measured from Hurricane Harvey was near Port Aransas at 132 mph at 9:42 p.m. Friday, Aug. 25. This occurred when Harvey's outer eyewall came ashore, according to the National Weather Service.
So far, Austwell (Refugio County) is reporting the highest rainfall total at 14.46 inches as of 8 a.m. Saturday.
10:31 a.m. - Road conditions already are limited along the Texas coast and more closures could come into the weekend as Harvey stalls across the region and dumps a heavy amount of rain. Check the map from TxDOT before considering travel.
9:45 a.m. - Hospital officials ask people not to visit their loved ones until operations return to normal. CHRISTUS Spohn Hospital Corpus Christi-Memorial remains closed -- including its emergency department -- at this time, the release states.
9:28 a.m. - There is boil water advisory in effect for all Ingleside residents. People are asked to bring water to a boil and continue to boil it for two minutes before use.
9:19 a.m. - U.S. Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, released the following statement: 
"Our Texas communities affected by this severe hurricane continue to be in my prayers, as are the first responders and emergency personnel who are working around the clock. The threat posed by Harvey is extreme, and Texans should continue to heed the warnings of local officials and emergency personnel.
"My staff and I will remain in close contact with FEMA, the Governor’s office, and local officials in impacted areas as Texas continues to endure this dangerous storm. Thank you to all Texans who will be helping those in need in the days and weeks ahead."
9:14 a.m - Island in the Son Church in the 10000 block TX-361 near Mustang Island sustains heavy roof damage. Click/tap to watch video .
9 a.m. - Hurricane Harvey now is a marginal, Category 1 storm with 75 mph winds, according to the 9 a.m. update from the National Hurricane Center . Its center is located 25 miles west of Victoria and is moving north-northwest at 6 mph.
The greatest threat for the Texas coast now is torrential rainfall measured in feet -- some areas could see in excess of 20 inches between Corpus Christi to Houston.
8:53 a.m. - ROAD UPDATE: I-37 at Navigation Blvd in Corpus Christi closed because of a sign down on the interstate. TxDOT has 250-300 employees accessing roads across south Texas.
8 a.m. - How long should food last in your fridge in a power outage? It depends -- no more than four hours in your refrigerator, no more than 48 hours in your freezer. It's even less time for perishable items.
7:30 a.m. - "Catastrophic" flooding is expected during the next several days as Hurricane Harvey parks itself over the Texas coast. Rainfall amounts could top 20 inches or more, according to a National Weather Service forecast.
In the meantime, Harvey is an 80 mph storm and is about 20 miles west-southwest of Victoria. It is moving north-northwest at 6 mph.
Early reports out of Rockport indicate the city has been hard hit as the storm made landfall. A better assessment of the damage will come with daylight.
6:35 a.m. - Corpus Christi residents are asked to reduce the use of their toilets and faucets. A power outage at the wastewater treatment plants has prompted this notice.
 
4 a.m. -The National Hurricane Center said Harvey, now a Category 1 hurricane, was slowly making its way inland over South Texas. Catastrophic flooding is expected over the next few days due to the heavy rainfall.
Harvey still has 100 mph winds and continues to move northwest at 6 mph. The National Weather Service said it is weakening and will be a tropical storm later today.
Hurricane Harvey had made its second landfall on the northeastern shore of Copano Bay at around 1 a.m. Saturday as a Category 3 hurricane, heading northwest at 6 mph. Hurricane and storm surge warnings remain in effect for all of the Middle Texas Coast, and flash flood watches are in effect for most of South Texas, as well as an extreme wind warning.
2:52 a.m. - According to the National Weather Service, a flash flood warning continues for Portland, Ingleside and Rockport until 6:45 a.m.
1 a.m. Saturday, Aug. 26 - According to the National Weather Service, Harvey is now at 125 mph and is located five miles north of Rockport.
11:54 p.m. - Rockport City Manager Kevin Carruth tells 3 News that the roof at a single story senior housing complex collapsed and a number of those people were taken to the jail for assessment and treatment. A total of 10 people have been treated in total from tonight's storm damage. The Courthouse there has also been severely damaged as well. Carruth adds that the historic downtown area has also seen heavy damage. There are also reports of damage to vehicles and roofs, but overall, the City is holding up well. The Emergency Management Center has lost its telephone landline and internet.
11:20 p.m. - Aransas Pass PD: We've lost all connectivity outside of public safety radios. If you dial 911, you will be routed through Portland's 911 as long as that remains up.
Stay safe and shelter in place. We are not leaving and will be here when it blows over...
10:30 p.m. - Single-story duplex-style building reportedly has collapsed and trapped people in Rockport, according to City Manager Kevin Carruth.
10 p.m.: The City of Corpus Christi issued a precautionary water boil advisory due to conditions caused by Hurricane Harvey. Residents need to boil their water prior to consumption, washing your hands or face, brushing your teeth, etc.
The aim of the water boil is to prevent the consumption of harmful bacteria and other microbes. Children, seniors and people with weakened immune systems are particularly vulnerable, and the city urges everyone to follow these instructions.
Once the storm has passed, the City will send crews to stabilize the system. They hope to lift the advisory as soon as possible.
9:45 p.m. - The eyewall stays north of Corpus Christi. Can still expect winds in excess of 90 mph.
9:20 p.m. - Check latest damage photos from across the area. 
8:55 p.m. - President Donald Trump signs disaster proclamation. 
8 p.m. - Hurricane Harvey still is a 130 mph Category 4 storm as of the National Hurricane Center's latest update. While the outer edge of the storm's eyewall is nearing Rockport, it is about 35 miles east from Corpus Christi. 
It is moving northwest at 8 mph.
The storm is historic -- the last Category 4 storm to hit Texas was Carla in 1961.
7:20 p.m. - The outer edge of Category 4 Hurricane Harvey's eyewall is making its approach to the outer shoreline, according to the National Weather Service.
7:10 p.m. - AEP's online outage map shows at least 60,000 customers without power in an area from Corpus Christi to Rockport to Victoria. 
6:40 p.m. - Hurricane Harvey is off shore by about 30 miles, approaching the Rockport area, according to meteorologist Alan Holt. The eyewall contains the highest, 130 mph wind -- Aranas and San Patricio counties will experience the worst shortly. 
6 p.m. - Hurricane Harvey has intensified to a Category 4 storm with 130 mph maximum sustained winds, according to the latest update from the National Hurricane Center. It is 45 miles east of Corpus Christi and its movement has slowed -- it is moving northwest at 8 mph.
Minimum central pressure is 941 mb.
The last Category 4 hurricane to make landfall in the U.S. was Hurricane Charley in 2004, which hit Florida.
5:54 p.m. -  Twelve people rescued by air from ship as Hurricane Harvey approached
5:08 p.m. - Do not expect Corpus Christi police officers to quickly respond to emergencies. In a tweet , they say life-threatening calls will be dispatched if conditions allow.
4:56 p.m. - An extreme wind warning is in effect for southwestern Calhoun County, Aransas County, east central Nueces County, eastern San Patricio County and central Refugio County.
Winds from 115-145 mph are possible as Category 3 Hurricane Harvey approaches land. The National Weather Service warns of swaths of tornado-like damage.
"TAKE COVER NOW! Treat these imminent extreme winds as if a tornado was approaching and move immediately to the safe room in your shelter. Take action now to protect your life!"
