Residents can use colleges' library
Aug. 30, 2017 at 10:21 p.m.
Updated Sept. 6, 2017 at 4:49 p.m.
Christopher Lee Fuentes, 36, points at the visible waterline of how high the Guadalupe River floodwaters got in his grandmother's home in Greens Addition.   Olivia Vanni                                                                                                                                                for The Victoria Advocate
11:45 p.m. Thursday update
The Victoria College and University of Houston-Victoria are inviting residents to use resources while the city's library is closed, according to the city.
Right now, the city's library is closed, but residents can instead go to the schools' library to charge phones, use the internet and print documents, the city said in a news released.
The library is located at 2602 N. Ben Jordan and is open Monday through Thursday from 7:45 a.m. to 10 p.m.; Friday from 7:45 a.m. to 5 p.m.; and on weekends from 1 p.m. to 6 p.m.
2:15 p.m. Wednesday update
City spokesman O.C. Garza said the city’s boil notice has been lifted. That means water is safe for residents to drink.
12:30 p.m. Wednesday update
VICTORIA RESPONDS CALL CENTER
The “Victoria Responds Call Center” is open to connect donors, volunteers and affected individuals from Hurricane Harvey with needed resources.  Call 361-433-2785 from 8 am – 5 pm Monday through Friday.
WATER BOIL NOTICE
The water boil notice remains in effect. The City is making progress on the testing necessary to re-certify the drinking supply.  Here are the details on the boil notice: http://www.victoriatx.org/Home/Components/News/News/1928/18.
TRASH, BRUSH SERVICE, RECYCLING
Regularly scheduled household trash collection resumed this week.  During this emergency, residents should use the gray carts, the green and yellow recycling carts, and plastic bags for household garbage. Keep all carts five feet away from the nearest object.
Both City and County residents can take tree debris to the limb drop-off center at Aloe Field (21900 Zac Lentz Pkwy., just west of Bob White Road and Highway 77 (Loop 463). This drop-off site is FREE and open 7 days a week from 8 am-6 pm.
Brush pick up services continues for limbs and brush only. Do not to stack limbs and brush on top of the water meters and near gas meters.
Recycling routes are suspended until further notice.
PERMIT FEES WAIVED FOR HURRICANE DAMAGED REPAIRS
The City is waiving any electrical permit fees for repairs caused by Hurricane Harvey. We are also waiving any permit fees pulled by homestead homeowners for hurricane damage repairs.
TRAFFIC CONTROL
Most traffic lights are operating on full-cycle. Report any malfunctioning traffic lights to 485-3381.
MOSQUITO SPRAYING CONTINUES
Spraying for mosquitoes in the City continues in the evening and early morning hours.
10 a.m. Tuesday update
The city of Victoria issued this update Tuesday:
VICTORIA RESPONDS CALL CENTER
The “Victoria Responds Call Center” is open to connect donors, volunteers and affected individuals from Hurricane Harvey with needed resources.  Call 361-433-2785 from 8 am – 5 pm Monday through Friday.
BOIL NOTICE
The boil notice remains in effect.  For details on the boil notice, please refer to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality notice at http://www.victoriatx.org/Home/Components/News/News/1928/18.
TRASH, BRUSH SERVICE
The regular schedule for household trash collection resumed Monday.  During this emergency, residents should use the gray carts, the green and yellow recycling carts, and plastic bags for household garbage. Keep all carts five feet away from the nearest object.
Brush pick up services continues. This pick up is for limbs and brush only.  At a later time, other storm debris will be collected. Residents are reminded not to stack limbs and brush on top of the water meters and near gas meters. Do not park vehicles in front of the debris.
Yard waste in the paper bags will not be picked up by the contracted brush service.  The bags that are already stacked will be picked up but residents are asked to stop putting the paper yard waste bags next to their limb stacks.  The City will collect the yard waste in bags at a later time.
Both city and county residents can take tree debris to the limb drop-off center at Aloe Field (21900 Zac Lentz Pkwy., just west of Bob White Road and Highway 77 (Loop 463). This drop-off site is FREE and open 7 days a week from 8 am-6 pm.
CURFEW ENDS
The curfew has been lifted.
TRAFFIC CONTROL
Most traffic lights are operating on full-cycle, but many other intersections remain on all way stop. Motorists should still use extreme caution in approaching intersections and be aware of traffic control crews who are still working to restore light standards and other equipment.
MOSQUITO SPRAYING CONTINUES
Spraying for mosquitoes in the City continues in the evening and early morning hours.
WANT TO HELP?
Official GoFundMe page to support the unmet needs of residents who were impacted by Hurricane Harvey. Click here to donate.
ELECTRICAL SERVICE
Electric service providers estimate over 93% of customers have power restored.  Efforts to complete electrical restoration continue.
Updated at 1:30 p.m. Monday
The city of Victoria issued this statement:
(Victoria’s recovery from Hurricane Harvey continues. Pending any significant developments, this is the only update for today. We continue to monitor the recovery progress and will share updates as needed.)
1. The boil notice remains in effect. For details on the boil notice, please refer to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality notice. Click here for the link.
2. A curfew is in effect from midnight to 6 a.m. every night until further notice.
3. More traffic lights have been repaired but many intersections across the city are still flashing all red and should be treated as a 4-way stop. Crews from the city of Austin are assisting the City of Victoria with restoring traffic signals and signs.
4. East High School, 4103 E Mockingbird Lane, and the Community Center, 2905 E. North Street, will be open from noon to 6 p.m. Monday to distribute free ice and water. ** Both distribution points will close Monday because the state will shift its resources to Houston. Faith Family Church will continue to give away water and ice at 2002 E. Mockingbird Lane.
5. The regular schedule for household trash collection has resumed. During this emergency, residents who have more household trash than will fit in the gray trash cart, may use the green and yellow recycling bin for overflow. Those needing more space can place plastic trash bags on the curb at least five feet away from any trash carts.
6. Brush pick up services are underway and will continue seven days a week.
7. Both city and county residents can take tree debris/bags of yard waste to a limb drop-off center at Aloe Field (21900 Zac Lentz Pkwy., just west of Bob White Road and Highway 77 (Loop 463). This drop-off site is FREE and open 7 days a week from 8 am-6 pm.
8. Spraying in Victoria for mosquitoes continues early in the morning and late in the evening.
9 Both AEP and VEC report that more and more power is being restored to customers in the city and the county.
10.. For information on home repair permits and contractors, call 361-485-3320. Fees will be waived on permits for repair and reconstruction for damage caused by Hurricane Harvey.
11.. For information about FEMA: www.DisasterAssistance.gov, or call 1-800-621-3362. FEMA representatives will be at the Faith Family Church Connection Center (2002 E. Mockingbird) starting today (Monday) through the end of the week from 8:30 am to noon and from 1-5 pm helping those affected by Hurricane Harvey apply for disaster assistance.
12.. The Hurricane Harvey Information Hotline will operate from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., 361-580-5796.
13. The “Victoria Responds Call Center” is now open to connect donors, volunteers and affected individuals from Hurricane Harvey with needed resources. To donate items or volunteer, call 361-433-2785 from 8 am – 5 pm daily.
---------------------------
Here are some reminders from the city of Victoria.
Updated 5:40 p.m Friday
MOSQUITO SPRAYING BEGINS TONIGHT
Spraying for mosquitoes begins at 8 p.m. Friday across the city. Spraying is done in the evening and early morning hours. If you are outside when the fogging truck approaches, go inside until the truck passes and the fog subsides.
Residents can help with mosquito control by emptying storm debris and other things such as old tires, bird baths, potted plants and clogged rain gutters that may be holding water that creates a prime breeding place for the pests. Mowing tall grass also helps to reduce breeding and swarming areas. Tree limbs and other storm debris should be stacked so it does not block drainage.
CURFEW HAS CHANGED
The curfew has changed. Effective tonight, curfew is midnight to 6 a.m. every day until further notice.
Updated 10:15 a.m. Friday
TRAFFIC CONTROL
Motorists should use extreme caution in approaching intersections and be prepared for significant traffic delays along thoroughfares.  Crews from the City of Victoria and the City of Austin are working to restore broken and missing equipment. Some lights are operating on full-cycle, but most intersections remain on all way stop.  Police officers will be directing traffic at some high traffic intersections during peak traffic times.  They will also be directing traffic at intersections where crews are working.
BOIL NOTICE
The boil notice remains in effect.  For details on the boil notice, please visit http://www.victoriatx.org/Home/Components/News/News/1928/18.
WATER AND ICE DISTRIBUTION
Free water, ice and Meals Ready to Eat will be distributed at the Community Center, 2905 E. North from noon to 6 p.m. Friday.  Additional distribution sites are being operated by other agencies in locations around the area.
ELECTRICAL SERVICE
AEPTexas anticipates that almost all their customers in the City will have power today.  Isolated cases may remain without power, and those situations are handled on a case-by-case basis.
Victoria Electric Co-op estimates that 65 percent of their customers in Victoria have electric service.  More crews are arriving daily to reach some of the outlying areas.
TRASH, BRUSH SERVICE
The courtesy drop off stations will remain open today for household waste only. The stations are open at 1701 SW Ben Jordan and 8505 N. Navarro (Enter off Bingham Street off Glascow).  Construction and storm debris will not be accepted. Trash should be in plastic bags when taken to the drop off location.
The regular schedule for household trash collection resumes Monday.  Residents with more household trash than will fit in the gray trash cart can use the green and yellow recycling bin for overflow or may place it in plastic bags.
Brush pick up services began Friday morning across the city.  Due to the extremely high volume of storm damaged trees, it may take 4 to 5 weeks to make the first complete pass of the city.  Another pass will be made after that initial pick up. This pick up is for limbs and brush only.  Other storm debris will be collected at a later time.
Residents are reminded not to stack limbs and brush on top of water meters and near gas meters. Do not park vehicles in front of the stacks.  Do not leave stacks in places where they could fall over into the street.
Residents who live outside the city limits may check the Victoria County website later Friday for a schedule of limb pick up services. www.victoriacountytx.org
Victoria County Official Website
Includes a list of departments, maps, and contact information.
DEVELOPMENT CENTER EXTENDS HOURS; WAIVES CERTAIN FEES
The Development Center is open Friday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. and will be open Saturday from 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. and from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. on Monday (Labor Day).  Fees will be waived on permits for repair and reconstruction for damage caused by Hurricane Harvey.
WANT TO HELP?
A GoFundMe page authorized by the City of Victoria and Victoria County has been established. Funds raised will be used to support the unmet needs of residents who were impacted by Hurricane Harvey.  https://www.gofundme.com/victoria-tx-disaster-relief-fund
Click here to support Victoria TX Disaster Relief Fund organized by John A Johnston
www.gofundme.com
In August of 2017, Victoria Texas was devastated by Category 4-rated Hurricane Harvey and the massive flood that resulted. These funds will be used to support the un-met needs of residents who were impacted by Hurricane Harvey.
The Volunteer and Donation Hotline is still in operation at 361-580-5790.
RIVER LEVELS
The Guadalupe River was at 30.54 feet at 8:15 Friday morning. The river levels are expected to fall below 29 feet tomorrow morning. The river will remain above flood stage through the middle of the week.
At Bloomington, the river crested at just over 29 feet. This morning, the level was at 28.64 feet.
Updated 7:40 p.m.
FEMA ASSISTANCE
Residents who suffered losses during the hurricane may seek assistance from FEMA by beginning a registration process at www.DisasterAssistance.gov, downloading the FEMA app or calling 1-800-621-3362.
Home | DisasterAssistance.gov | Access to Disaster Help ...
www.disasterassistance.gov
To find help for your immediate needs, please enter an address to get a list of the closest FEMA Disaster Recovery Centers (DRCs), starting with the closest three.
FEMA representatives are in Victoria conducting a door-to-door canvassing in some hard-hit areas to assist in registering people. If already registered through FEMA’s website or the FEMA app, the representatives can check the status of that application.
FEMA representatives wear shirts and have identification with the FEMA logo; they also have iPads for registering applications or checking the status of applications. Anyone with damage from Hurricane Harvey is encouraged to apply to determine eligibility for FEMA assistance.
TRASH AND BRUSH SERVICE
The temporary courtesy household waste drop off sites at Solid Waste Department offices at 1701 SW Ben Jordan and the Del Norte Complex at 8505 N. Navarro (Enter on Bingham) will be open for the final day on Friday from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.  This is for household trash only. Construction and storm debris will not be accepted. Trash should be in plastic bags when taken to the drop off location.
The regular schedule for household trash collection will resume on Monday.  Residents who have more household trash than will fit in the gray collection bin, may use the green and yellow recycling bin for overflow or may place it in plastic bags for collection.
Brush pick up services begin Friday morning across the city.  Thousands of cubic yards of limbs and brush will be picked up. It may take 4 to 5 weeks to make the first complete pass of the city.  Another pass will be made after that initial pick up. This pick up is for limbs and brush only.  At a later time, other storm debris will be collected.
Residents are reminded not to stack limbs and brush on top of the water meters and near gas meters. Do not park vehicles in front of the stacks.  Do not leave stacks in places where they could fall over into the street.
TRAFFIC CONTROL
Progress is continuing on restoring traffic lights. Between the City of Victoria crews and crews from the City of Austin, more intersections are returning to full operation. Police officers will be directing traffic at intersections where crews are working on the lights and at some of the highest traffic areas at peak traffic times. Approach all intersections with caution!
WATER
The water supply continues to operate.  The boil notice remains in effect. For details on the boil notice, please refer to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality notice at http://www.victoriatx.org/Home/Components/News/News/1928/18.
Ice and water will be available for distribution at the Victoria Community Center, 2905 E. North, from noon to 6 p.m. on Friday. Some meals will also be available for distribution.  Volunteers are needed to help with the distribution beginning at 11:30 and a second shift at 2:30.  Just go to the Community Center to help.
DEVELOPMENT CENTER EXTENDS HOURS, WAIVES CERTAIN FEES
The Development Center is open Friday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. and will be open Saturday from 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. and from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. on Monday (Labor Day).  Fees will be waived on permits for repair and reconstruction for damage caused by Hurricane Harvey.
TO HELP…
A GoFundMe page authorized by the City of Victoria and Victoria County has been established. Funds raised will be used to support the unmet needs of residents who were impacted by Hurricane Harvey.  https://www.gofundme.com/victoria-tx-disaster-relief-fund
Click here to support Victoria TX Disaster Relief Fund organized by John A Johnston
www.gofundme.com
In August of 2017, Victoria Texas was devastated by Category 4-rated Hurricane Harvey and the massive flood that resulted. These funds will be used to support the un-met needs of residents who were impacted by Hurricane Harvey.
The Volunteer and Donation Hotline is still in operation at 361-580-5790.
FOR MORE INFORMATION
The Information Hotline remains in operation from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. at 361-580-5796.
RIVER LEVELS
The Guadalupe River crested today at 31.25 feet.  At 4:15 this afternoon, the level was at 30.83 feet.
At Bloomington, the River is at just under 29 feet with a crest expected Friday afternoon at 30 feet.
11 a.m.Thursday
POWER RECOVERY CONTINUES
AEP Texas and Victoria Electric Coop are working to fully restore power to residents.  Businesses are re-opening as power is restored.  Business owners are welcome to post information as they re-open on the “Victoria Back in Business” Facebook page.
As power is restored to traffic lights, motorists are reminded to treat every intersection, whether or not there is power, as a full-way stop.
AEP reports about 13,400 customers remain without power in Victoria County this morning. Restoration is expected to 95 percent of the customers by Saturday night. Victoria Electric Co-op anticipates most areas of Victoria County will have power restored over the weekend but some areas will not come back on line until next week.  For restoration information, visit the VEC Facebook page.
WATER SERVICE
Water service continues uninterrupted.  The boil notice remains in effect.
TRASH SERVICE TO RESUME
Regular collection of household trash only resumes Monday. No brush, construction debris, yard waste or recycling will be collected on the regular routes.
Residents who have more household trash than will fit in their container may use the yellow and green recycling cart for excess trash. Plastic bags and other garbage cans may be used for excess trash. All trash carts must be at least five feet away from the nearest object, including parked vehicles and piled limbs. Do not place trash or brush on top of  water or gas meters.
The temporary courtesy household waste drop off sites at Solid Waste Department offices at 1701 SW Ben Jordan and the Del Norte Complex at 8505 N. Navarro (Enter on Bingham) remain open through Friday from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. for household trash only. Construction and storm debris will not be accepted. Trash should be in plastic bags when taken to the drop off locations. Residents should NOT leave trash at the gates when the centers are closed.
Commercial pick up service has resumed.
Brush collection (tree limbs and other yard waste only) begins across the city Friday morning. Residents should stack limbs and brush neatly in an accessible area but not so close to the street that the stack could fall out into the street or impede drainage. Do not park vehicles in front of stacks.
Brush collection will be a lengthy process as crews pick up large amounts of tree limbs and other yard debris. Bagged yard waste may be stacked on the limb pile or can be collected at a later time. Fencing materials or other storm debris is not being picked up at this time.
The landfill and compost site is open from 7 am to 5 pm. The regular fee schedule for the landfill and compost site applies.  All loads must be secure and covered.
RIVER FLOODING
The Guadalupe River is at crest, topping at 31.25 feet overnight.  The river levels will continue in the range of 31 feet for the rest of the day and then begin a very slow fall.  The river is expected to stay in flood stage well into next week.
At Bloomington, the river at 7 a.m. was at 28.53 feet with an expected crest of 30 feet tomorrow afternoon.
WATER AND ICE DISTRIBUTION
The distribution center for water and ice at the Victoria Community Center, 2905 E. North,  will be open from 12 noon to 6 p.m. Meals will also be available for distribution.
DONATE TO THE VICTORIA DISASTER RELIEF FUND
A GoFundMe page authorized by the City of Victoria and Victoria County has been established. Funds raised will support the unmet needs of residents impacted by Hurricane Harvey.  https://www.gofundme.com/victoria-tx-disaster-relief-fund.
Click here to support Victoria TX Disaster Relief Fund organized by John A Johnston
www.gofundme.com
In August of 2017, Victoria Texas was devastated by Category 4-rated Hurricane Harvey and the massive flood that resulted. These funds will be used to support the un-met needs of residents who were impacted by Hurricane Harvey.
Victoria County United Way is also accepting donations designated to member agencies for disaster services. Text “Victoria” to 313-131 for the link.
CURFEW, EVACUATION ORDERS
The 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. curfew remains in effect every night until further notice.
The Mandatory Evacuation Order for areas expected to experience river and stream flooding is still in effect.
FEMA APPLICATIONS FOR ASSISTANCE
Residents impacted by Hurricane Harvey can apply for FEMA assistance online at www.DisasterAssistance.gov or via a mobile app.  A toll-free number is also available: 1-800-621-3362.
Home | DisasterAssistance.gov | Access to Disaster Help ...
www.disasterassistance.gov
To find help for your immediate needs, please enter an address to get a list of the closest FEMA Disaster Recovery Centers (DRCs), starting with the closest three.
Residents who have registered for FEMA assistance may be visited by a FEMA representative.  These agents carry official credentials and will make contact prior to their arrival.
To report suspicious activity or individuals you believe are impersonating ICE/FEMA officials, call 866-347-2423 immediately.
FEMA provides the following steps to protect yourself from scam artists who may pose as government officials, aid workers, charitable organizations, or insurance company employees:
• Ask for identification and don’t be afraid to hang up on cold callers.
• Contact government agencies using information posted on their websites or in other official sources.
• Don’t sign anything you don’t understand or contracts with blank spaces.
INFORMATION HOTLINE
The Harvey Information Hotline continues in operation daily from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. at 361-580-5796.
VOLUNTEER/DONATION HOTLINE
To volunteer or make donations to assist victims of Harvey, please call 361-580-5790.
MAIL SERVICE
Carrier mail delivery has resumed. Access is available to post office boxes at James Moody Post Office, 2804 Sam Houston. PO Box delivery at the Post Office location at 312 S. Main remains suspended.
Power outage
AEP Texas has more 4,600 crew members from around the country working in the Coastal Bend to restore power to customers. About 17,300 Victoria customers remain without power as of Wednesday evening. AEP Texas will release preliminary estimate time of return of services for the following heavily impacted areas by Thursday:  Bonnieview, Woodsboro, Refugio, Tivoli, Austwell, Seadrift, Port Lavaca and Point Comfort.
FEMA accepting registrations for assistance
The Federal Emergency Management Agency has opened a registration process for people who have been significantly impacted by Hurricane Harvey and have no other available resources available to help in their recovery. Register at fema.gov or download the FEMA app. Applicants should make certain they keep their registration number. This is critical in processing the application for assistance.
Curfew, evacuation orders
The 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. curfew remains in effect every night until further notice.The mandatory evacuation order for the city of Victoria and Victoria County has been lifted with the exception of areas that are expected to experience river and stream flooding.
Trash collection
Regular collection of household trash will resume on Monday. The regular scheduled residential pickup is for household trash only. No brush, construction debris, yard waste or recycling will be picked up on the regular routes.
Residents who have more household trash than will fit in their container may use their yellow and green recycling cart for excess trash. Additionally, residents may use plastic bags and other garbage cans for excess trash. All trash carts must be at least five feet away from the nearest object, including parked vehicles and piled limbs.
Commercial pick up service resumed Wednesday.
The landfill will re-open Thursday morning. The compost site is also open.  The regular fee schedule for the landfill and compost site applies.  All loads must be secure and covered.
The temporary courtesy household waste drop off sites at Solid Waste Department offices at 1701 S.W. Ben Jordan and the Del Norte Complex at 8505 N. Navarro (enter on Bingham) will be open through Friday from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.  This is for household trash only.
RELATED
