Portland stands strong against Harvey
Sep 2, 2017
The McDonald's restaurant's golden arches did not fare well when Hurricane Harvey stormed through Portland.
+4 
Portland firefighters assist senior citizens Tuesday as they return to Portland. Firefighters evacuated 83 seniors citizens from the Coastal Palms Care Center prior to Hurricane Harvey. The seniors were transported to San Antonio.
+4 
Portland's Northshore Country Club lost a large section of its roof over the weekend after Hurricane Harvey stormed through the area.
+4 
PORTLAND – The strongest hurricane to make landfall in Texas since Carla tore through Portland last weekend, but emergency responders were glad of one thing – no loss of life in the city.
Hurricane Harvey landed last Friday night, but Portland firefighters began preparing for the storm much earlier. 
Fire Chief Lyle Lombard said the department began evacuating residents who needed assistance Thursday through the 211 program. Residents were sent to county officials, who transported them out of the Coastal Bend, with many likely going to San Antonio. The department has 60 residents on its register, and 12 requested assistance leaving.
“Some went by ambulance, and some went by bus,” Lombard said.
Firefighters also evacuated 83 seniors citizens from the Coastal Palms Care Center. Firefighters got the seniors on buses which took them to San Antonio.
Every employee who works for the department – as well as every piece of equipment the department utilizes – was on hand throughout the storm, Lombard said.
“We have an emergency management plan in place that we work with a lot,” Lombard said. “Police and firefighters work inside the plan every single day. We told our people to do what they know how to do. That’s what we train for.”
At 2 a.m. Saturday, first responders carried out some live rescue missions. In a few instances, some residents were stuck inside their houses, and first responders removed them. Lombard said first responders prioritized getting the people out – even though they weren’t injured – because trees had landed on the houses, and they were afraid they wouldn’t be able to call for assistance if it was needed.
Although many residents left the area, some – including Mike George – stayed throughout the storm. George had faith in his house – which is located on Fulton Place – because the home had withstood prior hurricanes; Carla in 1961 and Celia in 1970.
“Those were category threes, and this was (initially) a category three, so we figured there was no reason to leave,” George said.
The storm was eventually upgraded to a category four, however.
“That was a little nerve-wracking, but it was all right,” George said.
George’s property ended up suffering some downed trees and fences, and his house’s ceiling sustained a serious water leak. George measured precipitation at the property and said it received 14 1/2 half inches of rain. The house did not flood, however.
“We sit pretty high up,” George said. “When (the house) was built, there were no houses around it. It was one of the first on the block. The only thing that flooded was the street.”
The city – as a whole – received only minor damage, Lombard said.
“We had moderate damage to houses, trees and commercial buildings,” Lombard said. “A few buildings are considered destroyed and will need to be rebuilt.”
The city was never in nearly as much trouble as Rockport, where Harvey initially struck Friday night. Lombard said the department tried to contact Rockport then but ran into some communication issues. Several Portland first responders were eventually sent to the city, however.
“They had operations started, so we assisted them,” Lombard said.
Portland firefighters conducted two live rescues in Rockport, Lombard said.
“They were searching buildings and found people who couldn’t get out of the buildings,” Lombard said. “The town was totally destroyed.”
Portland firefighters also assisted personnel in Aransas Pass, which took significant damage. Portland fared the storm in better condition than some other neighboring cities, Lombard noted.
“What Rockport has could have been us,” Lombard said. “We’re very fortunate we had no casualties. That was our whole goal.”
Many homes in Portland still do not have power. A boil water notice ended Wednesday. Lombard said the fire department remains at full staff as well, mainly due to issues relating to downed power lines.
“We kept our staffing up because we’re concerned we might get house fires because of electrical problems,” Lombard said.
AEP is currently working to restore power, and the city is offering assistance in many ways. Those interested can receive assistance with insurance-related issues on the city’s website.
The community has pulled together to try and help the city recover, Lombard said. He encourages those wishing to provide Harvey survivors with funds or supplies to look toward Rockport and Aransas Pass.
