Save
In preparation for Hurricane Harvey, an emergency response meeting was held at the Karnes County Sheriff's Office in Karnes City on Friday morning with nearly 90 people in attendance.
Along with members of the Karnes County Sheriff's Office, all of the county fire departments and EMS crews were on hand as well as representatives from all four school districts and Judge Walter Long. Also on hand for the meeting were representatives from all the nursing homes, Otto Kaiser Memorial Hospital, the road and bridge department, county commissioners, Texas Department of Transportation, Texas Department of Public Safety and Emergency Management Coordinator Shelby Dupnik.
"As of now, we don't have any mandatory evacuations for our county nor do we have any shelters set up," noted Karnes County Sheriff Dwyane Villanueva. "We just ask that citizens secure all their personal property and stay home. There's no need to be out on the roads during this storm."
An incident command center has been set up at the sheriff's office and they can be reached at 830-780-3931 for updates.
As of 11 a.m. on Friday, Hurricane Harvey's eye, with a pressure of 947 mb, was located at 26.7 north, 96.0 west and it was a strong category two storm with maximum sustained winds of 110 miles per hour with gusts of 130 mph. It was still moving northwest at 10 mph and is still expected to make landfall anywhere between Corpus Christi and Palacios later on tonight.
Karnes County can expect near hurricane force winds within 24 hours, however, the predicted rain from this storm could be well over 20 inches in the next two to three days, causing severe flooding issues.
The Karnes County Sheriff's Office will also be updating its Facebook page as well as the road and bridge Facebook page.
"We will be fully staffed and at the ready should we be needed," added Villanueva. "We will be monitoring the storm from our command center and will stay on top of things the best we can."
Road conditions can be checked at www.conditions.drivetexas.org . For road closures, call 800-452-9292.
Weather conditions can also be checked at www.weather.gov .
