AEP Texas Hurricane Harvey restoration update
Posted:
Updated:
AEP Texas has crews from all over the United States helping to restore power here in the Coastal Bend.
COASTAL BEND -
As of 9:30 a.m. on Monday, AEP Texas crews have restored electric service to 179,000 of the 220,000 customers who lost power as a result of Hurricane Harvey. Below is a list of updated information.
AEP Texas will continue efforts to restore power to all remaining customers without electricity in all areas impacted by the storm. 
 
Outage Update 
Shown below are the latest outage numbers listed by the area where the highest number of outages remain: 
Aransas Pass - Rockport Area    29,600
Victoria                                                 4,900
Port Lavaca - Refugio Area             6,400
 
Estimated Time of Restoration (ETR) 
Following are projected ETRs for these communities:
Victoria:                      Mon., Sept. 4, 10 p.m.
Port Lavaca               Mon., Sept. 4, 10 p.m.
Ingleside:                   Wed., Sept. 6, 10 p.m.
Rockport -Fulton:       Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.
Port Aransas:             Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.              
Rockport:                   Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.
Aransas Pass:           Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.
Refugio                      Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.
Woodsboro                Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.
Tivoli                           Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.
Austwell                     Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.
The ETR for any city not listed above is 10 p.m. on Friday, Sept. 8, if not sooner.  
Public Safety
AEP Texas wants to remind customers to not approach crews while they are working to restore power. AEP says this is very unsafe and can cause distractions leading to accidents and injuries. Also, interrupting crews while they are working slows down the restoration process.
Please continue to consider all downed power lines as energized and dangerous. You can report downed power lines and other safety hazards like broken poles to AEPTexas.com or by calling (866) 223-8508.
Additionally, AEP Texas asks all consumers who are currently using generators to follow all safety precautions from the manufacturer. Generators should never be used inside the home.
Lastly, as power is being restored to customers around the area, residents are reminded to clear cooktops and electric stoves of any debris; and ovens should be turned off.
Outage map 
Customers can track progress on the restoration effort by visiting the outage map at www.aeptexas.com. It features the most current available information. Customers also can sign up for outage alerts to receive updates via text or email.
The KRISTV.COM application is available now on the App Store™ and Android App Store.
Apple, the Apple logo, iPod, and iTunes are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the U.S. and other countries. iPhone is a trademark of Apple Inc.
WEATHER
