Near Magnolia Beach: 79 mph
Palacios: 69 mph
Corpus Christi Int'l Airport: 63 mph
Austin Bergstrom Int'l Airport: 52 mph
Pounding waves on top of Harvey's storm surge also inundated parts of the Texas Coastal Bend, resulting in damage in some areas.
The maximum observed water level rise at Harvey's landfall point was 6.71 feet at Port Lavaca.
Harvey was the strongest landfall in this area, known as the Texas Coastal Bend, since Hurricane Carla, in September 1961.
To see a complete radar loop of Harvey from landfall until the end of its lifespan, Brian McNoldy at the University of Miami, Rosenstiel School, has put together an incredible seven-day radar loop that you can see here.  
The only other Category 4 landfall of record near the Texas Coastal Bend was the infamous Indianola hurricane of August 1886, which devastated the town of Indianola just 11 years after another Category 3 hurricane, eventually turning the former bustling port into a ghost town.
Catastrophic, Record Flooding in Southeast Texas
Harvey's extreme slow movement Aug. 26-30 kept a fire hose of moisture pointed into southeast Texas and Louisiana for days, resulting in catastrophic flooding.
Numerous flash flood emergencies were issued for the Houston and Beaumont, Texas, metropolitan areas, and for Bastrop County and nearby communities.
The areal coverage of locations picking up at least 20 inches of rain was greater than the state of West Virginia, while the 40-inch-plus zone was larger than Delaware.
The top rainfall total is 60.58 inches in Nederland, Texas from Aug. 24-Sep. 1. Incredibly, a second site, Groves, Texas, also topped the record book by receiving more than 60 inches during that same time period. Both of these topped the previous tropical cyclone rainfall record. 
Pending final confirmation, this rainfall total would be the heaviest from any tropical cyclone in the U.S. in records dating to 1950, topping the 48-inch storm total in Medina, Texas, from Tropical Storm Amelia in 1978, according to research by  NOAA/WPC meteorologist David Roth .
Top Rainfall Reports
60.58 inches near Nederland, Texas
60.54 inches in Groves, Texas 
56.00 inches in Friendswood, Texas
54.77 inches near Santa Fe, Texas
54.00 inches near Bunker Hill Village, Texas
52.87 inches on Clear Creek at Interstate 45 near League City, Texas 
49.31 inches near Dayton 
49.20 inches on Mary's Creek at Winding Road 
49.06 inches near Beaumont, Texas
45.74 inches near Pasadena
44.91 inches near South Houston
43.38 inches at the NWS forecast office in Houston (League City)
37.01 inches at Houston Hobby Airport
35.87 inches near Sabine Pass, Texas
31.26 inches at Houston Bush Intercontinental Airport
28.14 inches in northeast Galveston
21.88 inches in Smithville
19.64 inches in College Station
17.28 inches near Lake Charles, Louisiana
15.60 inches near Victoria
9.96 inches near Watson, Arkansas
9.12 inches near New Iberia, Louisiana
8.27 inches near Gautier, Mississippi
7.95 inches at Pensacola Regional Airport, Florida
6.68 inches near Alexandria, Louisana
5.73 inches near Plano, Kentucky
Please note that a previous report of 51.88 inches on Cedar Bayou near Highlands, Texas has been taken off the books by NWS Houston due to this gauge and several others being flooded or being impacted by high winds, which hinder the capability of gauges capturing the true rainfall amounts. 
Houston's Bush Intercontinental Airport crushed its record-wettest calendar day Sunday by over 5 inches, picking up 16.07 inches of rain, just under the five-day total of 16.48 inches from Tropical Storm Allison in 2001. Houston's Hobby Airport also crushed a two-day rainfall record by almost 8 inches , picking up 23.06 inches of rain Aug. 26-27.
Houston had two of its five heaviest calendar-day rainfalls from Harvey.
The average rainfall within the Harris County Emergency Management network exceeded that of Tropical Storm Allison (2001) in almost half of the time (2 to 3 days versus 5 days). The Harris County Flood Control District estimated one trillion gallons of water was dumped on the county alone in four days .
Harvey's flooding has caused one of the worst weather disasters in U.S. history, with a price tag that will amount to billions of dollars. The HCFCD estimated 70 percent of Harris County was flooded by at least 1.5 feet of water , with an estimated 136,000 flooded structures in the county alone , as of August 31.
Thousands of water rescues occurred in the Houston metro area as many homes and businesses were swamped by floodwaters.
Houston wasn't the only location to suffer disastrous flooding.
Jack Brooks Regional Airport near Port Arthur, Texas, picked up a staggering 26.03 inches of rain on Aug. 29 alone, more than doubling the previous calendar-day rainfall record  in Beaumont-Port Arthur set over 94 years ago. Its storm total from Aug. 26-30 was an incredible 47.35 inches of rain, almost 25 inches greater than  its previous record four-day rain record set in September 1980.
The resultant flooding swamped a storm shelter in Port Arthur, prompting evacuees to be moved to another shelter.
Interstate 10 between Beaumont and Winnie, Texas, was overtaken by the floodwaters, as well.
Serious flooding also occurred southwest of Houston along the Brazos, Colorado and Guadalupe Rivers.
In total, 19 National Weather Service river gauges had observed record flooding as of Aug. 31.
This wasn't just a story in Texas and Louisiana, either. According to hurricane researcher Brenden Moses, Harvey was among the wettest tropical cyclones on record in Kentucky, Tennessee and Arkansas . 
Harvey has also spawned numerous brief tornadoes in southeast Texas, Louisiana, Alabama, Mississippi, Tennessee and North Carolina. Harvey is one of the most prolific tornado producers for a tropical cyclone, but the true number of tornadoes produced by Harvey may never be known. Many tornadoes tracked near or through floodwaters and many may have crossed paths. 
In the southwest suburb of Missouri City, more than 50 homes were damaged in the Sienna Plantation neighborhood.
One EF2 was reported near Evangeline, Louisiana during Harvey, which is the strongest known tornado during that hurricane. The tornado traveled for more than 2 miles damaging 4 homes, a truck, numerous trees and a few power poles. One home lost the majority of its roof and had exterior wall failure. 
On Aug. 31 into the early morning of Sept. 1, significant flash flooding was reported in parts of Arkansas, Kentucky, Mississippi and Tennessee, including the Nashville metro area . About 30 water rescues were performed in Davidson County, Tennessee. Evacuations were needed along Whites Creek, Browns Creek, Mill Creek and Seven-Mile Creek in the Nashville metro. 
Numerous roads were closed and county schools were closed Friday in Simpson County, Kentucky. 
The Weather Company’s primary journalistic mission is to report on breaking weather news, the environment and the importance of science to our lives. This story does not necessarily represent the position of our parent company, IBM.
The Weather Company An IBM Business
