More: Hurricane conditions: What to do if your house is flooding
7:17 a.m.: The Coast Guard is doing urban search and rescue in the Houston area due to flooding. More than 300 requests for rescues have been received and the Coast Guard has asked for helicopters from New Orleans and support from the Air National Guard to help.
Tips: Don't call for rescue if you are not in a life-threatening situation. Rescue teams are prioritizing rescues by urgency.
If you are in need of rescue, call 911 or the U.S. Coast Guard Houston Command Center at 281-464-4851.
If you are in a flooding situation:
Stay calm, do not panic.
Do not go into the attic, rescuers from the air cannot see you.
Get to high ground immediately.
Mark the roof to be seen from the air. Wave sheets, towels, to be noticed from the air.
6:48 a.m.: First Christian Church in Corpus Christi (3401 Santa Fe St.) will have a silent service from 10:30 a.m. -noon today for prayer and reflection regarding the storm's impact on the community.
6:41 a.m.: Schools of the Diocese of Corpus Christi will be closed Monday. Diocese superintendent Rosemary Henry announced the closure in a news release. 
More: UPDATED: Aransas County ISD cancels classes for two weeks, others out Monday
6:15 a.m.: The Rockport Volunteer Fire Department is coordinating volunteer first responders for search-and-rescue efforts. First responders are being advised to plan to bring food and water  and be there for four to five days.
5:17 a.m.: Many residents in South Texas are waking up in a shelter or remain in homes without power as emergency and AEP Texas crews continue massive recovery efforts.
Meanwhile, the National Weather Service  is cautioning that the continued threat of Harvey, which is now pummeling Houston with heavy rainfall, is flash flooding.
More: Harvey recovery: Your Hurricane Resource Center
5 a.m.: The Coast Guard rescued six people from a home near Aransas Pass overnight.
Coast Guard Sector Corpus Christi received a report at 7 p.m. of three children, their parents and an elderly woman in need of oxygen, in need of assistance.
A MH-60 Jayhawk helicopter aircrew landed about a half mile from the home and took the family and carried the woman to the Jayhawk. The family was taken to Christus Spohn Memorial Hospital in Corpus Christi.
The elderly woman was in stable condition and the children and their parents had no reported injuries.
12:35 a.m.: Key highlights of the latest Hurricane Harvey briefing by the National Weather Service:
Harvey remains a tropical storm, with maximum sustained winds of 50 mph. 
Storm surge warnings remained in effect from Port Aransas to Port O'Connor for inundation of 3-6 feet above ground level. 
Harvey has become nearly stationary northwest of Victoria.
Catastrophic, life-threatening flooding is expected across portions of the region.
11:41 p.m.: Aransas County ISD has cancelled school for the next two weeks.
Superintendent Joseph Patek said in a post on the school district's Facebook page that officials were informed the county would be without power for two to four weeks.
“This will include cancelling any and all extra-curricular practices and events,” Patek said in the post. “The goal is to have students back in class the week of September 11.”
Updates on an official return date will be posted on the ACISD Facebook page and website, the post reads. Staff members also were advised to monitor their school email for information.
11:08 p.m.: All Whataburger Restaurants in Corpus Christi remained closed Saturday.
According to the restaurant locator on their website, the closest locations that were open were in Kingsville. On Friday, Whataburger said it would reopen its restaurants when it is safe enough to do so.
10:15 p.m.: U.S. Postal Service employees are doing everything they can to connect people affected by Hurricane Harvey with their mail.
According to a news release, postal representatives will assist people in shelters with temporary change of address forms and establishing temporary operations to deliver mail to shelter residents.
Postal Service employees in areas affected by Hurricane Harvey should check for changes to their scheduled work reporting status by contacting the USPS National Emergency Notification Hotline. The toll-free hotline for employees is 1-888-363-7462, the release states. Employees also are encouraged to call the hotline to report their condition.
In order to ensure residents receive their mail, the U.S. Postal Service is encouraging residents to clear debris and obstructions that block access to the mailbox. Mailboxes that are damaged or destroyed should be replaced with an approved mailbox with the address clearly displayed, the release states.
If your residence is not livable, contact your post office and request a 30-day hold. Visit www.usps.com to file change of address forms and for more information.
9:51 p.m.: Hurricane Harvey has left Aransas County without power, internet and phone service.
In a post on the Rockport Fulton Chamber’s Facebook page, Aransas County Sheriff Bill Mills said the Aransas County Sheriff’s Office is coordinating door-to-door searches with more than 100 officers from state and federal agencies.
Every residence with signs of damage will be checked, Mills said in the post.
“Please do not call and request a welfare check on your friends and loved ones. Unfortunately too many residents failed to heed the evacuation warnings,” Mills said in the post. “I remind you not to be alarmed yet, that you have not heard from your loved ones as we have no phones, internet or power. Please bear with us as we go about checking out the county.”
9:32 p.m.: All water service is discontinued in Portland until further notice because of a shortage in water deliveries from San Patricio Municipal Water District, officials said.
According to a post on the city of Portland's Facebook page, the city will continue to work with the water district to restore service.
9:25 p.m.: About 1,000 first responders have made their way to the Texas Coast, and specifically areas around Rockport, Port Aransas and Corpus Christi, to assist with search and rescue missions.
“They’ve just been going and going and going. Around the clock, 24-7,” said Texas Department of Public Safety Sgt. Nathan Brandley, who is also a public information officer for the agency, which has dispatched about 100 troopers to assist.
Officials expect more first responders to arrive in coming days to help sift through debris left after Harvey made landfall as a Category 4 hurricane, pummeling the Coastal Bend.
The storm continues to dump heavy rain in areas northeast of Rockport and Port Aransas. Texas Forest Service Regional Fire Coordinator Cason Wood, who is positioned in El Campo, said they are preparing for heaving flooding Monday and Tuesday in Matagorda, Wharton, Jackson, Colorado, Austin and Fort Bend counties.
“The rivers are supposed to be cresting at that time,” Wood said.
8:13 p.m.: Aransas County Sheriff Bill Mills confirmed one man was killed and 30 to 40 others remain unaccounted for following Hurricane Harvey’s battering of Aransas County.
The man killed in the storm was discovered Saturday in his home, which was destroyed by a fire as the category 4 hurricane churned through Fulton. There are no confirmed deaths in Rockport, he said.
Emergency personnel were aware of the fire but the storm’s strong winds and rain prevented them from responding, Mills said.
In addition, about 30 people were treated for injuries throughout Aransas County.
Jessica Newsom, regional supervisor of Allegiance Mobile Health, said most of the residents were treated and taken to Aransas County. After receiving care, the storm victims were taken to storm shelters at Fulton and Live Oak elementary schools.
Two victims were also taken to a hospital in Corpus Christi with non-life threatening injuries.
Search and rescue efforts are continuing, but are being hampered by lingering storm conditions, including flooding and collapsed structures, Mills said.
Personnel are following up on emergency calls to check on the welfare of 30 to 40 Aransas County residents.
8:04 p.m.: The Coast Guard responded to a report of seven people in distress near Aransas Pass. Watchstanders at Coast Guard Sector Corpus Christi received a report at about 7 p.m. that seven people at a residence were in need of assistance. One person was said to be on oxygen and had run out. A Coast Guard Aviation Training Center MH-60 Jayhawk helicopter aircrew was launched to aid the seven people.
7:41 p.m.: Urban Bricks Pizza announced it would be serving the community a free meal while supplies last. In the wake of Hurricane Harvey the restaurant, located at 4902 S. Staples Street A2, will open at 11 a.m. Monday.
7:48 p.m.: H-E-B has opened more stores after the landfall of Hurricane Harvey.
H-E-B stores now open include Corpus Christi locations at 4444 Kostoryz Road, 11100 Leopard St. in the Calallen area, 4320 Alameda St., 3133 S. Alameda St. near Glazebrook Street, 5425 S. Padre Island Drive near Blanche Moore, 1145 Waldron Road, 3500 Leopard St. near Nueces Bay Boulevard, 3033 S. Port Ave. and H-E-B Plus! at 5313 Saratoga Blvd. are open.
Stores in Alice, Falfurrias and Kingsville also opened Saturday.
7:41 p.m.: The Port of Corpus Christi has begun assessing impacts sustained from Hurricane Harvey. Initial assessments uncovered light to moderate damage and debris. The Port Police Marine Patrol are assisting emergency operations in the Port Aransas area and the Harbor Master’s Office continues to support coordination efforts for possible obstructions in the Corpus Christi Ship Channel along with the U.S. Coast Guard.
The port is monitoring impacts in the Corpus Christi Ship Channel and La Quinta Ship Channel. The port’s Emergency Operations Center, Security Command Center and Harbor Master’s Office are not damaged and they continue to maintain uninterrupted operations.
7:39 p.m.: About 5 p.m. Saturday, the Gas Department’s phone lines were down because of a power outage. Residents with gas concerns should call 361-826-2489.
More: Harvey 2017: What's happening with city cleanup, utilities?
6:57 p.m.: Gov. Greg Abbott and his wife Cecilia Abbott are helping serve dinner at a Red Cross shelter for hurricane evacuees in Austin. The governor assured evacuees the state is doing everything it can to asist in the recovery effort.
5:26 p.m.: The city of Corpus Christi is reminding residents to reduce using their toilets and faucets because of power outages at the wastewater treatment plants, according to a news release. The city will notify residents when the plants are back in operation.
4:23 p.m.: In a tweet, Congressman Blake Farenthold said President Donald Trump plans on visiting the Coastal Bend early next week.
4:08 p.m.: H-E-B has opened more stores after the landfall of Hurricane Harvey.
H-E-B stores at 4444 Kostoryz Road, 11100 Leopard Street in the Calallen area, 4320 Alameda St., 3133 S. Alameda St. near Glazebrook Street and H-E-B Plus! At 5313 Saratoga are open.
Stores in Alice and Falfurrias also opened Saturday afternoon.
4 p.m.: Customers using water provided by pump stations in Agua Dulce, Banquete, Sablatura Park, Central and Driscoll should use water sparingly and for essential purposes only.
Residents in the areas of Agua Dulce Baquete, Driscoll and southwest of Robstown, which include the subivisions of Fiesta Ranch, Indian Trails, La Paloma, Lost Creek, Rancho Banquete, Spring Gardens, Sweet Water and the Plains, also are affected.
The Central Pump station and the Driscoll Pump Station have been operating from an emergency generator. Power suppliers have been notified and requested to make power restoration of those pump stations a priority, but a time of restoration is unknown, according to a press release.
Customers will be notified once power is restored and pump stations are no longer using emergency generators.
4:00 p.m.: A tweet from National Weather Service Corpus Christi said Tropical Storm Harvey continues to produce heavy rainfall. Flooding will continue to be the main concern going forward.
3:54 p.m.: Sgt. Alan Graham of the Port Aransas Police Department said officers have wrapped up their search for 80 to 100 residents who sheltered in place in the seaside tourist community.
"All are accounted for," he said.
No one was seriously injured when Hurricane Harvey roared through Port Aransas.
"It's incredible," Graham said.
All day Saturday, teams of officers searched the community for anyone trapped in the rubble of homes shredded by the strong winds and storm surge.
With search and recovery completed, Graham said the city can move to the next stage, which includes clean-up and restoring power.
Police are seeking a sun-up to sun-down curfew.
"We are protecting property at convenience stores, liquor stores and other properties," Graham said.
Hurricane Harvey survivors are being taken to a shelter in Corpus Christi, he said.
3:51 p.m.: The City of Corpus Christi continues its emergency operations efforts with full Emergency Operations Center activation at readiness level 1, according to a city news release.
“Police, Fire and City employees have worked around-the-clock to prepare for the storm, ride-out and begin recovery,” the release states. “The City of Corpus Christi has also been engaged in providing early assistance to our neighboring communities experiencing devastation from Hurricane Harvey.” The following work continues in order to bring the city back to prestorm status:
Securing alternative power sources for a variety of operations. This includes additional generator supplies for the O.N. Stevens Water Treatment Plant and various wastewater operations. The boil water notice and recommended reduction of wastewater are still in place due to Hurricane Harvey.
Disaster Assessment Team assessments including an initial “windshield” driving assessment followed by a more detailed analysis have been conducted since dawn this morning. These include five person teams from Fire, Police, Code Enforcement, Development Services and Risk Management.
Utilities has been at work repairing signs, traffic lights, water main breaks and debris management.
“The goal is to clear main roads and then focus on neighborhood debris,” the release states. “Due to the high winds, many trees were blown over with many in the streets. Removing debris is critical in order that AEP can mobilize crews to repair damaged infrastructure.”
Officials said the goal is to recover from Hurricane Harvey and ensure the safety of the public, first responders and city employees.
3:48 p.m.: The Driscoll Children's Hospital and its emergency department still are operational and dealing with the aftermath of the storm, according to an announcement from the hospital. They report having enough food, water and supplies.
Fifty-two patients and 350 staff members are at the hospital. The hospital did not lose power during the storm and there "has been no negative impact on patient care during the storm," according to the release. It said the hospital and its grounds suffered only minimal damage of broken tree limbs and water leakage.
3:27 p.m.: Rain will continue into the middle of next week, as rain bands from Tropical Storm Harvey sweep the Coastal Bend until Saturday night. Heavy rain fall is expected through Wednesday.
Rainfall totals are expected to fall between 20 and 30 inches with isolated areas experiencing 40 inches.
According to a National Weather Service forecast, Harvey is expected to meander near South Texas over the next couple of days as it weakens, resulting in a continuance of heavy rainfall, flash flooding and strong winds.
3:08 p.m.: As of 3 p.m. Saturday, Corpus Christi Police had no updates on a man who was shot Friday on the Southside of Corpus Christi.
Senior Officer Travis Pace said Saturday he does not know the man’s age or name.
No other major incidents were reported Friday night, he said.
Since Hurricane Harvey’s landfall there have been some thefts. But Pace said he can’t say for sure where each incident was reported.
There also have been some accidents, but no major accidents have been reported as of 3 p.m. Saturday, Pace said.
2:52 p.m.: H-E-B stores in Falfurrias, Alice and three locations in Corpus Christi have reopened. Caller-Times photographer Rachel Denny Clow reports on Twitter the H-E-B at 3333 South Alameda is open and has gasoline.
2:45 p.m.: Christi International Airport crews have completed an initial assessment of the airfield and found minor damage but the airfield and terminal remain closed.
The airport will be allowing emergency response operations on the runways but only on a limited basis and only for agencies that get prior permission to land.
For now, the FAA Air Traffic Control Tower remains closed and it is unknown when the airlines will be resuming service. The airport will be “working closely with its tenants to get things back to normal as soon as possible,” a release state.
Airport Public safety and operations are working their regular schedules.
2:25 p.m.: The Coast Guard rescued 15 people Saturday from three vessels in distress near Port Aransas. Watchstanders at Coast Guard Sector Corpus Christi dispatched two Coast Guard Air Station Corpus Christi MH-65 Dolphin helicopter aircrews to assist the vessels Sabine Pass, Sandy Point, and Signet Enterprise. A separate Coast Guard Aviation Training Center MH-60 Jayhawk helicopter aircrew also rescued a man, a woman and a dog that were stranded Saturday in Rockport.
2:11 p.m.: One person is dead in Rockport, according to Mayor C.J. Wax. 
1:51 p.m.: Corpus Christi Animal Care Services temporarily will accept lost pets, according to a tweet from the Corpus Christi Police Department's Twitter feed. The service will help reunite the pets with their owners by checking microchips and following up on information on collar tags.
1:48 p.m.: Gov. Greg Abbott, speaking at the state’s emergency operations center in Austin, praised what he called the “resilience” of those displaced by Harvey and said he was moved by their resolve and their courage.
“It was so heartening to shake the hands of those evacuees as they got off those buses,” the governor told reporters. “They were what I call typical Texans. They were resilient, they were strong, but mostly, they were happy to be alive.”
Abbott spent the morning before going to the EOC speaking with local officials in the affected areas.
He could not confirm reports of fatalities spreading on social media and other outlets, saying that he must first get word from local authorities, and then determine if any deaths that might be reported were related to the storm.
Meanwhile, additional staffing is being deployed to the coast, Abbott said. The total troop number from Texas National Guard units has reached 1,800 and 80 troopers from the Texas Department of Public Safety are assigned to Corpus Christi to work with local law enforcement officials, the governor added.
1:43 p.m.: The city of Corpus Christi has advised via its official Twitter feed that residents may return to the city but that the water boil notice still is in effect and wastewater usage, like flushing toilets, must be limited becausee of power outages at the wastewater plants.
1:05 p.m.: Harvey has been downgraded to a tropical storm, according to the 1 p.m. advisory from the National Hurricane Center. Sustained winds measure at 70 mph. It's moving north-northwest at 2 mph and dropping lots of rain as it goes. Rainfall totals are expected to be between 15 and 30 inches. Isolated areas may get up to 40 inches.
12:24 p.m.: Facebook posts on official accounts for the City of Aransas Pass and the City of Ingleside remind residents it is unsafe to return.
12:19 p.m.: Refugio football coach Jason Herring said via text message that the town has “lots of damage” and that the high school, which was just renovated has lost its roof. He added the roof on the First Baptist Church of Refugio also had lost its roof.
Refugio was in the direct path of Harvey’s eye wall late Friday night and early Saturday morning.
12:15 a.m.: Nueces County District Attorney Mark Gonzalez announced Saturday that his office will seek jail time for forthcoming cases in which someone is charged with looting, burglary, robbery or like crimes committed during Hurricane Harvey, according to a press release from the department. The office will not offer or agree to probation in these cases.
11:59 a.m.: Aransas County and Tuloso-Midway independent school districts and Incarnate Word Academy have announced school closures next week. Aransas County is closed Monday and Tuesday while Tuloso-Midway and Incarnate Word are closed Monday.
School closures: Full list of school closures in Coastal Bend
11:46 a.m.: A couple of the RV parks along State Highway 361 in Port Aransas are tipped over. Many of the power lines are snapped in two.
Parts of the roof from the Grand Caribbean was ripped off and Port Royal condos also was damaged.
In some places there’s only room for one vehicle to pass along the debris-filled roads.
Several helicopters from Red Cross and Coast Guard have flown over the town.
Heather Miller, 53, rode out the storm at a motel.
She said she knew she was in danger when at one point during the night her motel door blew open and a metal sheet flew by.
11:41 a.m.: AEP says weather conditions have improved but wind conditions must be below 30 mph hour before the bucket trucks can be used to address downed power lines. And there still remains the possibility of flooding over the next few days.
“Right now, we are trying to determine if we can safety let crews begin this first step,” said Tom Coad, AEP Texas vice president of Distribution Region Operations. At the same time, in areas where it is safe to do so, we will instruct our damage assessors to begin activities to determine the extent of the damage inflicted by Hurricane Harvey.”
Meawhile, utilities are down still in Aransas Pass. It is not safe to return home and unfortunately the extent of the damage is unknown, according to the Aransas Pass Police Department.
San Patricio Electrice Co-op says there were more than 8,100 meters without power, mostly in Bee County and San Patricio County.
"Harvey is slowly making its way through our service area and conditions are still not safe for our linemen to work. We will continue waiting until we can safely send our employees out into the field," the co-op said.
11:33 a.m.: The community of Port Aransas suffered extreme damage including downed power lines, destroyed homes and businesses.
About 80-100 people are believed to be have tried to ride out the storm.
City Manager David Parsons said they are mobilizing state police, troopers, National Guard and local law enforcement to conduct search-and-rescue efforts.
There are no confirmed deaths.
National Guard units arrived at the civic center to mobilize for search efforts.
Three residents who stayed during the storm described “howling winds” and said they awoke to “utter devastation.”
11:22 a.m.: Rockport Mayor Pro Tem Pat Rios is asking evacuees not to return.
"What are you going to come back to? There is no power. Very little cell phone service," Rios said in a Rockport-Fulton Chamber tweet. "What we need right now is state assets."
11:07 a.m.: Corpus Christi Regional Transportation Authority is stopping service until further notice. The RTA's phone lines are down due to hurricane conditions.
10:53 a.m.:  The outage number in Nueces County reaches 103,170. No word yet from AEP on restoration efforts. All utilities are down in Aransas Pass, a neighboring county. It is not safe to return home and unfortunately the extent of the damage is unknown, according to the Aransas Pass Police Department.
10:45 a.m.: San Patricio County Emergency Management has declared a mandatory water boil for customers with water wells, city water, Rincon and San Patricio County Municipal Water District in San Patricio County.
Customers should boil water at least 3 minutes before drinking or cooking. It is not clear at this time when the boil order will be lifted.
Cities will be sending out a notice upon their water boil lift.
10:43 a.m.: The Texas Department of Criminal Justice says it will evacuate about 4,500 inmates from units along the Brazos River in Rosharon as the flood threat in upland areas intensifies.
“The offenders are being transported by TDCJ buses, and are accompanied by correctional officers and other staff members who have reported to work to assist in the evacuation. Offenders assigned to the units will be sent to facilities in East Texas,” TDCJ said in a statement.
The affected lockups are the Ramsey, Terrell, and Stringfellow Units. The evacuation means that visitation privileges are temporarily on hold.
10:40 a.m.: Also, Valero’s Corpus Christi and Three Rivers refineries are assessing the refineries' status and potential impacts from hurricane Harvey's landfall.
10:38 a.m.: At most entrances there are security guards, hospital staff and Corpus Christi police outside Christus Spohn Hospital Shoreline, which remains under a no visitor policy. The hospital is only taking emergency cases.
Hospital staff has been advised that they could also be receiving massive numbers of residents injured in the storm that hit Rockport and other neighboring coastal communities the hardest.
. @CHRISTUSSpohn Shoreline is prepared to possibly receive mass casualties from #Rockport #HurricaneHarvey pic.twitter.com/vlLJvP6LI0
— Rachel Denny Clow (@CallerClow) August 26, 2017
10:18 a.m.: Our staff is reporting that many homes and businesses have been destroyed and some residents had to be rescued by emergency crews, who are still trying to reach some areas of these communities.  
Meanwhile, aid is also reaching another coastal town, Port Aransas, which has massive storm debris.
— Gabe Hernandez (@callergabe) August 26, 2017
10:11 a.m.: On-duty Port of Corpus Christi police and security personnel are assigned
to primary security access control points and patrol of port facilities. Marine patrol is working with the Army Corps of Engineers for inspections of the Corpus Christi Ship Channel and the Inner Harbor. They will assist the harbor master in finding the number of damaged vessels and equipment, according to a port news release.
10 a.m.: These are road closures from TxDoT:
SH361 is closed south & northbound to Ingleside due to downed electrical lines over the roadway.
SH 188 is closed due to flooding from Sinton to Rockport’s City-By-The-Sea.
FM 892 is closed due to flooding from Robstown to Petronila.
9:41 a.m.:  Larry Jones of AEP says he'll have some info to push out soon on efforts to bring power back in the affected areas. Meanwhile, power outage numbers have been holding fairly steady over the past 90 minutes or so (knock wood). AEP's number for Nueces County is up to 101,179. San Patricio County clocks in at 25,140. Victoria County reports 21,097 and Aransas County stands at 18,996.
9:02 a.m.: The Coast Guard is responding to vessels in distress near the Lydia Ann Channel near Port Aransas.
Mayday notifications came from crew members aboard the tugboats Belle Chase, Sandy Point, and Sabine Pass. 
Coast Guard Air Station Corpus Christi deployed two MH-65 Dolphin helicopter aircrews that are en route for rescue.
8:20 a.m.: Nueces County officials say the courthouse, which houses Emergency Operations Center (EOC), held up well though debris surrounds it. When safe, Public Works crews will assemble and will be assessing damage to other county buildings and roads.
The Nueces County EOC is working with western County School Districts, Emergency Services District, and Cities to assess needs and/or damage. The EOC is also in Communication with the Port of Corpus Christi.
RELATED: See photos of the storm's aftermath
7:51 a.m.: The power outage number in Nueces County is now at six figures. AEP says 100,194 are without power. Repair crews are already out in mass.
Also, more than 190 Corpus Christi police officers from all the department's divisions are spreading out across the city to help 
7:30 a.m.: Now that the sun is coming up the Caller-Times staff is fanning out to various parts of Corpus Christi including the island, and areas most affected like Rockport.
Streetlights are down in downtown Corpus Christi. #HurricaneHarvey pic.twitter.com/p78yHE988T
— Rachel Denny Clow (@CallerClow) August 26, 2017
7:19 a.m.: TXDoT confirmed through drivetx.com that Interstate Highway 37 northbound is closed because of damage.
7:16 a.m.: There is a water boil notice for residents in Ingleside in San Patrico County. Boil your water for at least 2 minutes before using. It is okay to shower with, but not for brushing teeth, drinking, or cooking with unless you boil it for at least 2 minutes.
There are downed power lines and some flooding. Until rescue workers can reach those these areas, stay in your house/other safe structure.
There are still winds and more rain expected. Do not leave your secure location until emergency authorities can clear the power lines and the flooded areas have receded.
Ingleside Emergency Operations Center: 361-776-0325 or call 361-523-9499 or 361-522-0240.
7:13 a.m.: Back-of-the-envelope math shows that more than 162,000 AEP customers along the Coastal Bend and the counties immediately inland woke up Saturday facing power outages.
Meanwhile, there are no reports of damages or outages at Christus Spohn Shoreline Hospital. We are working to get more details.
6:44 a.m.: Residents are reporting many local radio stations are down including 94.7, 106.5, 102.3, 96.5, 95.5, 92.7 FM.
A couple working are KKLM 88.7 FM and 89.5 FM.
6:38 a.m.: The City of Corpus Christi is asking all residents to reduce the use of their toilets and faucets because power outages have affected the Wastewater Treatment Plants.
The city will notify residents when the plants are back in operation.
For the latest updates on Hurricane Harvey, stay connected at www.cctexas.com/harvey . Details are also available at facebook.com/citygov and at twitter.com/cityofcc
6:36 a.m.: 99,587 without power as the sun is about to rise in Nueces County and 24,951 in San Patricio County.
6:03 a.m.: Highlights of the latest briefing of the storm by National Weather Service:
Storm is now a category 1 hurricane; it had maximum sustained winds of 90 mph.
Weather officials believe the storm is transitioning to a prolonged, heavy rainfall event over the next few days. It is expected to become a tropical storm by the end of the day Saturday.
As of 5:15 a.m., Harvey was 30 miles southwest of Victoria. It moved northwest at a pace of 6 mph.
5:53 a.m.: The city of Corpus Christi is asking for the public's help about trees over roadways and other nonemergency damage.
The reports can help city crews and law enforcement get a clearer picture of damage and obstructions.
CC residents: We need your reports of trees over the roadways or other non-emergency issues in your neighborhoods (361) 826-2489 #StaySafeCC
— CityOfCorpusChristi (@cityofcc) August 26, 2017
3:06 a.m.: The National Weather Service has downgraded Hurricane Harvey to a category 2 storm. Harvey had been declared a category 3 storm Friday afternoon, and later a category 4 storm around 6 p.m. The storm's intensity is still very strong; officials at the weather service's facility near Corpus Christi International Airport said Harvey's maximum sustained winds were 110 mph.
The storm system continued to move slowly across the region.
1:43 a.m. The National Weather Service expects Hurricane Harvey's winds to slowly weaken, but maintain hurricane-force speeds through Saturday. That was according to a briefing released by the weather service to news organizations. The report also said Harvey to "meander" over the region, maintaining tropical storm winds along portions of the area through at least Sunday. 
1:05 a.m.: Hurricane Harvey is now a category 3 storm with 125 mile per hour winds. The National Weather Service said on Twitter the storm is located 5 miles north of Rockport.
12:54 a.m.: Corpus Christi police said a man who they believe was shot during a break in as Hurricane Harvey made landfall was "coherent" when he was rushed to a hospital.
Officers were called to the 7100 block of Ficus Court around 11 p.m. Upon arrival, they found a man who had been shot in the head, officials said. According to officers at the scene, the man had broken into the residence and was shot by the homeowner. 
The shooting happened about an hour after Hurricane Harvey -- a category 4 hurricane -- made landfall near Corpus Christi. 
The man was taken to Christus Spohn Hospital Shoreline. In a tweet, Corpus Christi police said the person was coherent when medics took him to the hospital.
11:40 p.m.: Rockport City Manager Kevin Carruth confirmed that there are damages throughout the city. Responders are out while the eye of the storm is over the city but will return to safety once the eye passes.
“We’re not going to be able to get everywhere within the short window we have before the eye leaves,” Carruth said.
He said there is major tree damage all around and that the courthouse has had major damage. There’s a cargo trailer that is halfway in the building, he said. He also said that there are vehicles damage “all over the place.”
He said there were 10 injuries brought in from roof collapses in different places, and they are taking them to the jail to assess them and provide treatment.
He did not have an estimated of how many collapsed buildings or residences.
When asked about the best practices for people needing help during the storm, Carruth said 911 is still operational.
“They can call 911 and make us aware of what the situation is and as soon as we’re able to we will be able to get help to them,” Carruth said.
11:36 p.m.: AEP is reporting 32,356 customers in Nueces County without power. San Patricio County shows 12,314 customers out, Aransas County has 8,602 customers out, Bee County shows 1,996 customers out and Refugio County has 1,023 out.
11:30 p.m.: Residents whose property has sustained storm damage may sign up for assistance from the Federal Emergency Management Agency since President Donald Trump has approved a disaster declaration for Bee, Goliad, Kleberg, Nueces, San Patricio, and Refugio counties.
Residents should call 1-800-621-3362 and be ready to provide their address with zip code, directions to their property, the condition of the damaged home, any available insurance information, their Social Security number, a phone number where they can be reached and an address where mail can be sent.
11:25 p.m.: A flash flood watch is in effect for Portland, Ingleside and Rockport until 3:45 a.m. according to the National Weather Service Corpus Christi.
11 p.m.: Reports that the high school in Rockport is gone appear to have been inaccurate, according to the volunteer fire department in Rockport.
“A part of the roof has caved in, but the reports that buildings have disappeared don’t appear to be accurate,” said Gillian Cox, the department's public information officer.
Cox said the department has received a number of calls related to reports of collapsed buildings that were later confirmed to be standing.
The volunteer department is not expected to begin any damage assessment work until after rescues are completed. Those efforts will resume as soon as the wind falls below 45 miles per hour, Cox said.
There are eyewitness accounts, however, of severe damage to other structures around the seaside town.
The extent of damage won’t be known until the sun comes up, Cox said.
10:54 p.m.: Harvey remains a category 4 hurricane with maximum sustained winds 130 mph with gusts of 160 mph. A "life threatening catastrophic" storm surge of 9 to 13 feet is expected between Port Aransas and Port O'Connor, according to the latest report from the NWS.
10:30 p.m.: AEP now reporting a reversal of fortune for Nueces County power customers. From a high of 42,000 or more almost an hour and half ago, now the number stands at 37,996.
10:27 p.m.: Gusts above 130 mph are raging through Rockport and there are reports from residents that the Rockport-Fulton High School has been destroyed. 
Sgt. Kyle Burns with the Texas Military Department said he did not have information about the developing situation in Rockport, but they are prepared to provide assistance as needed.
“We’re standing by to help our local law enforcement agencies immediately, whenever they ask for it,” Burns said. “A lot of what the National Guard does is help with search and rescue. During the storm, it’s a lot more difficult.”
10:25 p.m.: The eye of the storm has now made landfall between Port Aransas and Port O'Connor.
10:19 p.m.: In an alert to residents Kingsville City Manager Jesus A. Garza said that city's water supply has not been affected by Hurricane Harvey or by the water boil in nearby Corpus Christi.
"Our water production team has been proactive in maintaining our water quality," Garza said.
9:58 p.m.: The City of Corpus Christi has issued a precautionary boil water notice because the storm has made the water system "unstable," according to a city news release.
Residents should boil their water before consumption (washing hands/face, brushing teeth, drinking, etc.)
This applies to customers who get a water utility bill from the City of Corpus Christi. Because of the storm, the water system has become unstable and out of an abundance of caution the City wants to protect residents.
9:55 p.m.: Let's recap. In the AEP area along the Coastal Bend. the outage number approaches 67,000. Most are in Nueces County, where the number is north of 40,000. San Patricio County shows 12400-plus in the dark. Bee County has more than 1,850 outages and Calhoun County's number is 1,350.
9:53 p.m.: The outage number in less-populated Aransas County is starting to inch up, now at 8,610.
9:39 p.m.: AEP just adjusted the Nueces County outage numbers downward. Now it stands at 40,477. We're checking if areas regained power or if the 9:12 p.m. was inflated. Stay tuned.
9:36 p.m.: Rockport police reported one family is trapped after a tree fell on their home.
            Power Outages
9:19 p.m.: The outage number keeps growing and growing. In Nueces County, it stands at 42,485. San Patricio County reports 14,361. Check back. These numbers are likely to change.
9:15 p.m.: The Harbor Master Building along Conn Brown Harbor in Aransas Pass blew away.
Post by AransasPassPD .
8:51 p.m.: The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has just granted Texas Gov. Greg Abbott's request for a Presidential Disaster Declaration in response to the hurricane.
8:40 p.m.: The eye of the hurricane is over San Jose Island and Aransas Bay and should be over Rockport County in Aransas County in the next 10 minutes or so.
Residents are urged to seek shelter in the most central location you can find in your home, and try to get some protection over your head as this storm will likely remove most homes' roofs.
Following the worst conditions residents have experienced today will come a calm sky. Don't be fooled -- that's the eye of the storm and only a brief break. Intense winds and rain will continue within minutes.
CHECK OUT THE HURRICANE HUB 
8:30 p.m.:  A weather station in Port Aransas measured a wind gust of 116 mph., according to the National Weather Service. 
8:10 p.m.: Aransas County Emergency Management Chief Deputy John Gutierrez said they are stuck in the building and do not know about what damages may have occurred in the area.
“It’s over 100 miles an hour outside I think and raining like crazy, and there’s no way to tell,” Gutierrez said.
While they are receiving calls from people who may be trying to report things to Emergency Management, they cannot respond to anything because winds are too high. He said they are expecting to not be able to respond until the wind stops.
Also, Hurricane Harvey is causing 81 mph sustained winds in Flour Bluff. 
7:58 p.m.: More than 1,700 members of the San Patricio Electric Co-op were without power as of 7 p.m. A majority of the outages were Bee and San Patricio counties. Crews were expected to assess damage and make restore power after the storm passes, according to news release.
“We are expecting significant damage and extended power outages in our service territory due to Hurricane Harvey. However, our employees are prepared to work diligently and safely to restore power to each and every one of our members,” said Ron Hughes, general manager of San Patricio Electric Cooperative.
You can view the co-op's outage map here: https://ebill.sanpatricioelectric.org/mapviewer/mapviewer.html?config=Outage+Web+Map
7:37 p.m.: Harvey now has wind gusts of up to 160 mph, according to a briefing from National Weather Service Corpus Christi. The eyewall, where sustained winds remain at 130 mph, is onshore now in Port Aransas and Rockport and will move over Aransas Pass and Bayside by late evening.
Rainfall forecasts are holding steady at 15-25 inches with isolated areas of up to 40 inches.
The briefing says the deepest water will occur along the immediate coast and northeast of landfall, including Port Aransas, Aransas Pass, Rockport, Fulton, Bayside, Lamar Peninsula, and Austwell.
More: Harvey 2017: Trump provides assurances that Texas will be protected, Abbott says
7:22 p.m.: According to a tweet on National Weather Service Corpus Christi's account, the outer eyewall is moving onshore near Port Aransas and Rockport.
7:20 p.m.: Harvey is centered 35 miles east of Corpus Christi, according to a post on the National Hurricane Service's Facebook page. Winds are holding steady at 130 mph.
6:44 p.m.: The outage number spikes to 33,869 in Nueces County and to 11,838 in San Patricio. In Aransas County, 1,116 customers were without power.
Landfall is just hours away, according to the National Weather Service.
6:41 p.m.: Gov. Greg Abbott also declared the state would not collect hotel-motel occupancy taxes through Sept. 6 to make lodging more affordable for those seeking refuge from Hurricane Harvey.
"I do hereby suspend all laws authorizing or requiring the collection of state or local hotel or motel occupancy taxes from the victims of Hurricane Harvey or personnel participating in relief operations, for a period of 14 days, beginning August 23, 2017, and ending September 6, 2017," the governor said in an official proclamation.
6:33 p.m.: Gov. Greg Abbott on Friday visited Texans seeking refuge from Hurricane Harvey at a shelter in San Antonio. He thanked people across the state offering assistance and resources to those in need. Earlier in the day, Abbott sent a letter to President Donald Trump requesting a Presidential Disaster Declaration . 
The governor also met with first responders stationed there to thank them for their service and sacrifice helping others during this dangerous storm.
"My message to all Texans is to put your life first and heed all warnings from local officials," Abbott said in a statement. "While Texas has state and federal resources staged in multiple locations, I encourage all in the storm’s path to take their lives into their own hands and make sure they are out of harm's way. I also ask that everyone join me in keeping those affected, and our brave first responders, in your thoughts and prayers during this trying time and to continue offering aid and assistance where possible."
6:03 p.m.: The hurricane has been upgraded to a category 4. 
National Weather Service officials are advising counties near the hurricane eye to brace as if a tornado was approaching. Winds are between 115 to 145 MPH. 
5:21 p.m.: In the past hour and a half, the number of outages in Nueces County has more than doubled. The total, which has been rising steadily, stands at 27,635.
5:21 p.m.: Texas State University in San Marcos, which is between San Antonio and Austin about 180 miles north of Corpus Christi, canceled its classes for Monday citing concerns about the weather. Low-lying areas on the campus are prone to flooding, the university said in a letter to students and staff posted on its website.
“Your personal safety is of paramount importance and we encourage you to exercise your best judgment during this weather event,” the letter said.
4:49 p.m.: All Corpus Christi police officers have been ordered to take shelter, and they will not be responding to any emergency calls until Hurricane Harvey’s most intense weather passes.
Lt. Chris Hooper, a spokesman for the department, said officers will not wait for the storm to pass completely, but will wait until it’s safe for them to respond. There is no way to know exactly when that will be, but Hurricane Harvey’s effects on Corpus Christi are expected to worsen through the night and into early Saturday.
As of 4 p.m., the storm had sustained winds of 125 miles per hour and was 60 miles from Corpus Christi. Hurricane force winds extend 35 miles from the center, and tropical storm force winds extend some 140 miles from the center.
Police Chief Mike Markle said previously officers would cease being dispatched when the sustained winds were above 60 miles per hour.
4:47 p.m.: The number of customers without power in Nueces County keeps climbing. It's now at 21,035.
4:40 p.m.: Forecasts show two feet of rain is possible in Corpus Christi. Other areas could see as much as three feet of rain. Corpus Christi is on the south side of Hurricane Harvey, which is usually associated with less severe damage than what is seen on the north side in previous tropical storm systems.
4:36 p.m.: The outage report jumped to 18,499 in Nueces County but was holding steady with 3,907 in San Patricio.
More: Harvey 2017: Here’s the latest on power outages in the Corpus Christi area
4:34 p.m.: Hurricane Harvey has reached speeds of 125 mph. There is a tornado warning for the area.
3:57 p.m.: Port Aransas Independent School District has canceled all classes and closed school facilities until further notice, according to a social media post.
More: Corpus Christi-area schools prepare for Harvey, Port Aransas cancels until further notice
3:41 p.m.: AEP reports 11,894 customers in Nueces County without electricity. In San Patricio County, the number was 3,900.
3:20 p.m.: Power is out at the KIII-TV station, located at 5002 South Padre Island Drive, according to a social media post by Sean Kelly, a meteorologist with the station.
2:35 p.m.: AEP is reporting more than 10,280 customers are without power along the Texas Coast. The bulk of the outages are in Corpus Christi. Nearly 9,340 customers in Nueces County are listed without power. AEP crews are staging to help as soon as it's safe.  
