Volunteer attorneys will answer phone calls from 3 p.m. to 5 p.m., Monday through Friday, through Sept. 29. Extended LegalLine hours will be available from 3 p.m. to 9 p.m. on Wednesday Sept. 6 and Sept. 20.
Those seeking answers to legal questions or referrals may call 713-759-1133 or 1-866-959-1133.
The HBA's Houston Volunteer Lawyers is working with Lone Star Legal Aid to coordinate legal aid for low-income persons affected by Harvey. 
Houston Chronicle sports columnist Brian T. Smith talks about the Houston Astros on their one day off visiting people at George R. Brown Convention Center hoping to bring some smiles to fans that may have lost everything in Hurricane Harvey.
Media: Houston Chronicle
Information:  www.makejusticehappen.org/Harvey
12:20 p.m. VA deploys mobile vet centers, medical units to Houston area
The VA has deployed five mobile vet centers, three mobile medical units, one mobile pharmacy and one mobile canteen to greater Houston and other areas affected by tropical storm Harvey. The units will offer medical care, pharmacy assistance, counseling services and benefits referral from Wednesday Sept. 6 to Sept. 30. The hours are 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
They are located at NRG Arena, 1 NRG Park (mobile vet center); American Legion Post 658, 14890 FM 2100, Crosby (mobile vet center); Silsbee High School, 1575 U.S. 96 North, Silsbee (mobile medical unit); the Beaumont VA Outpatient Clinic, 3420 Plaza Circle, Beaumont (mobile medical unit, vet center and canteen); the Lone Star Veterans Association, 2929 McKinney St., Houston (mobile medical unit, vet center and pharmacy); and Wal-Mart, 23561 U.S. 59, Porter (mobile vet center).
Veterans may also call the Telecare Call Center at 1-800-639-5137 or 713-794-8985 for medical issues or questions
11:50 a.m. House approves $7.9 billion initial aid package for Harvey losses
The U.S. House of Representatives voted overwhelmingly Wednesday to provide $7.9 billion in aid to address losses from Hurricane Harvey, a move that could be paired with legislation to increase the federal government's borrowing limit.
The initial aid package, approved 419-3, is bigger than the amount floated by the White House over the weekend when President Donald Trump made his second trip to Texas in the wake of the storm. But divisions remain among House and Senate Republicans about tying the aid to the debt-limit increase.
The Senate is expected to attach the money to a debt-limit vote later this week. Conservatives in the House and Senate, including Texas U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, have voiced concern about linking the two votes, which Cruz called "unrelated matters."
Translator
To read this article in one of Houston's most-spoken languages, click on the button below.
Senior Texas U.S. Sen. John Cornyn, the Republican Majority Whip, said he supports the plan as a way to immediately replenish needed funds for the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
11:45 a.m. Postal service continuing its Harvey recovery
The U.S. Postal Service says its continuing the recovery from Hurricane Harvey
"We're open for business and delivering where it's accessible and safe to do so," the postal service said in a statement Wednesday morning. 
The following offices have resumed normal operations: Brazoria, Lumberton, Sweeny and Thompsons, the postal service said in a news release on Tuesday. All offices in the Houston District have resumed normal operations except for Bear Creek, Deweyville, downtown Beaumont, Glen Flora, Katy, Mauriceville, Nome, Orange and Stowell. The operations for these offices have shifted to other locations.
The postal service urges customers in affected areas to check its website for updates on service interruptions. Updates on service alerts may be found at:  http://about.usps.com/news/service-alerts/resident-weather-updates.htm
Those interested in information about a specific post office may call 1-800 ASK-USPS.
11:25 .a.m. Police look for man who went missing during storm
Houston police are looking for a 44-year-old man who went missing as he tried to drive to work on Aug. 26, as Tropical Storm Harvey was moving into the Houston area.
Police said Joseph Dowell left for work at around 2:30 p.m. from the 5600 block of Kennilwood but never made it to work. He is described as a bald African-American man who is 5 foot 9 and 190 pounds. Anyone with information is asked to call the missing persons unit at 832-394-1840.
11:12 a.m. H-E-B family member donates $5M to J.J. Watt's relief fund
A member of the H-E-B family has announced a major donation to Houston Texans star J.J. Watt's Houston Flood Relief Fund.
H-E-B chairman and CEO Charles Butt will deliver a personal, $5 million contribution to the Justin J. Watt Foundation's fund, which has collected in excess of $21 million. This looks to be one of the largest personal contributions so far going toward Hurricane Harvey relief efforts.
Watt's fund started last week with a modest total of $100,000 and has now become a global effort with contributions by fellow sports figures, celebrities, business owners and regular people chipping in what they can.
11:10 a.m. Nonprofit focuses on children's needs after Harvey
The nonprofit group Children at Risk was to host a meeting with more than 20 area non-profit leaders on Wednesday morning to discuss Hurricane Harvey recovery efforts.
"As we rebuild our homes, schools and communities, it is imperative to focus on our most vulnerable residents – children," the group said in a news release. "The leaders have identified 6 key areas that Texas must be aware of as we move forward with recovery efforts."
11:01 a.m. Abbott says no hazardous waste sites in Houston area found leaking so far
AUSTIN — Gov. Abbott said Tuesday that an inspection of hazardous waste sites and landfills in the Houston area has found no evidence so far of any leakage or health threats.
At a morning briefing with reporters at the state's Emergency Operations Center, Abbott said five of 17 state sites have been inspected and show no signs of leakage or other issues so far. He said one site, International Creosote, remains flooded.
Eleven others are awaiting inspection, officials said. Abbott said inspections are continuing at the state sites.
Abbott said Texas Commission on Environmental Quality are working closely with federal Environmental Protection Agency officials to closely monitor the sites for any problems.
MONDAY, Sept. 4
9:45 p.m. 500 homes "destroyed" in south Montgomery County subdivision
Five-hundred homes were "destroyed" by Hurricane Harvey in the south Montgomery County subdivision of River Plantation, said Montgomery County Precinct 2 Commissioner Charlie Riley.
Riley said volunteers, county employees and law enforcement are conducting relief efforts there, and members of the Federal Emergency Management Agency are helping victims get federal aid.
9:20 p.m. Addicks, Barker reservoirs continue to drop
Addicks and Barker reservoir continued to drop Monday night. Flooding of homes behind the dams was expected to end in the coming days.
Addicks reservoir's pool was down to 105.65 feet. At 103.4 feet, all house flooding should end, said Harris County Flood Control District meteorologist Jeff Lindner.
Barker's level was at 97.99 feet. At 94.9 feet, flooding behind Barker should end, Lindner said. 
8:05 p.m. Two Harris County flood victims identified
The Harris County medical examiner on Monday identified two victims of last week's Harvey-related flooding. They had been included previously in the number of confirmed dead in the county, which now stands at 30.
The first victim is Charles Ray James, 65, who was found floating in high waters on a residential street in the 7400 block of Claiborne on Thursday. The second is Samuel Lawrence Burns, Sr., 62, who was found Wednesday in the 4900 block of Airline Drive after apparently collapsing in high water.
More than 60 people in the Houston area and other parts of the state have died since Hurricane Harvey made landfall on Aug. 25 and unleashed record flooding.
7:50 p.m. Harris County warns of heavy traffic, signal delays during Tuesday's commute
Harris County officials warned that road closures and traffic signal timings would likely create a significant traffic headache Tuesday morning.
Houston area roads are expected to see the highest number of cars Tuesday since Hurricane Harvey made landfall Aug. 25.
There are still several roads closed in Harris County including State Highway 6, Barker Cypress Road, North Eldridge Parkway and Clay Road all north of I-10. Parts of Westheimer Parkway, South Barker Cypress Road and other roads near the Harris County border with Fort Bend County are also closed.
Traffic signals will have special timing schedules to accommodate for traffic altered due to road closures.
7:25 p.m. Houston mayor to decide on curfew Tuesday
Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner said he would make a decision on whether to extend a  citywide curfew on Tuesday. 
The curfew prohibits people from leaving their homes between 12 a.m. and 5 a.m. It is in effect Monday night. 
Turner will announce on Tuesday whether it will remain in effect Tuesday night and beyond.
"Persons involved in flood relief efforts, flood relief volunteers, individuals seeking shelters, first responders, and persons going to and from work (late shift workers) are exempt from the curfew," according to the city.
6:45 p.m. Brazoria County bans recreational boating on Brazos, San Bernard Rivers
Brazoria County Judge Matt Sebesta issued an order Monday banning recreational boating on the Brazos River, San Bernard River, Oyster Creek and Bastrop Bayou.
The order was signed in "an effort to minimize damage to real and personal property of others and for public safety during this disaster," according to a county notice. It would remain in effect until Sebesta rescinds the order or the disaster declaration for the county is removed.
The Brazos had retreated to moderate flood stage earlier in the day, days after reaching a record height.
6 p.m. Army Corps reducing releases from Barker dam
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers began reducing the amount of water released from Barker reservoir Sunday night, a move that continued Monday and promised to reduce widespread flooding in west Houston along Buffalo Bayou downstream of Addicks and Barker dams.
As of Monday evening, Barker reservoir was releasing between 5,000 and 6,000 cubic feet per second of water, down from 6,300 CFS in the days before.
Once the Barker releases get down to 4,000 CFS, the Corps said it would begin decreasing releases from Addicks "until we have our releases back below the high banks of Buffalo Bayou," said Richard Long, Natural Resource Management Specialist at the Corps' Galveston District.
The goal, eventually, is to get releases down to 4,000 CFS combined from Addicks and Barker dams.
5:10 p.m. Face recognition software matching pictures of lost pets with those found in shelters
People who lost their pets during Hurricane Harvey can upload the pet's picture into an app that will use facial recognition to match the pictures with animals checked into shelters in recent days.
Photos of animals arriving in shelters are being uploaded into a database.
If someone has lost their pet, they can upload a picture of the pet to findingrover.com or the Finding Rover smartphone app.
An algorithm will try to make a match and provide the pet's potential location. The service is free for shelters and pet owners.
Our Mihir Zaveri has the full story here .
5 p.m. FEMA extends grace period for paying flood insurance premiums
If your flood insurance premium payments were due between July 24 and Sept. 22, and you live in a county that was included in a presidential disaster declaration after Hurricane Harvey, the Federal Emergency Management Agency has extended a grace period by which you can pay your premium.
The grace period is now 120 days, according to FEMA. That means you won't lose coverage if you can't make your payment right away, up to 120 days from when it's due.
"FEMA wants to ensure that policyholders affected by flooding caused by Hurricane Harvey can focus on their immediate needs, begin to recover, and continue to have flood insurance coverage in the event of additional flooding," the agency stated in a notice Monday.
The agency also made it easier to receive payments faster and waived some paperwork necessary to process claims.
Read more here .
4:45 p.m. City of Houston: Cleaning after Hurricane Harvey may pose health hazards
People 7-years-of-age and older with cuts or other wounds should get a tetanus shot and see a doctor if they were exposed to Hurricane Harvey's floodwaters, city officials warned.
The officials said: residents should use special, N-95 rated dust masks when cleaning moldy homes that took on floodwaters.
Surfaces should be washed with soap and clean, warm water and sanitized with bleach.
Any standing water should be drained so disease-carrying mosquitoes cannot breed, the officials warned.
3:30 p.m. FEMA registrations up to more than 550,000
The Federal Emergency Management Agency said Sunday it has received more than 550,000 applications for aid in the aftermath of Tropical Storm Harvey.
FEMA has so far granted applications for 176,000 people. Aid totals include $50 million for housing assistance, including rental assistance and $91 million to replace personal property, pay for transportation and shoulder medical and dental costs.
The agency also opened a disaster recovery center at the George R. Brown Convention Center that will be open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m., seven days a week until further notice. Those affected can apply for assistance, get a status update on an application, speak to a FEMA representative, or discuss a low-interest disaster loan with a Small Business Administrative representative.
3:15 p.m. Harris County begins debris removal
Harris County began removing debris from outside of people's homes Monday.
Officials said residents should place debris curbside "without blocking roadway or storm drains" and sort it into the following categories: vegetative debris, construction and demolition debris, appliances and electronics.
Debris that won't be picked up includes normal household trash and hazardous waste.
Those with questions are encouraged to call (713) 274-3880 or can find more information here .
3:02 p.m.: Gov. Abbott asks that 7 counties added to presidential disaster area
Gov. Greg Abbott asked that seven counties be added to the Federal Disaster Declaration previously granted by FEMA, bringing the total request to 43 counties.
The new additions are Austin, Bastrop, DeWitt, Gonzales, Karnes, Lavaca and Lee counties.
11:48 a.m. East of Houston, death toll rises to 17
The Southeast Texas death toll from Harvey rose to 17 on Monday, the Beaumont Enterprise reports.
Newton County Sheriff Billy Rowles said a Deweyville man and a Newton woman have died in his county due to floodwaters.
Orange County officials said Sunday there have been nine storm-related deaths in the county so far. Four of the deaths were elderly people and possibly related to a power outage, according to officials.
"If you have a friend or family member that did not leave areas that were impacted by the rising waters and you have not heard from them, we urge you to contact your local law enforcement."
Port Arthur spokeswoman Risa Carpenter said an elderly  woman's body was found inside her home on 22nd Street in Port Arthur on Saturday.
Colette Sulcer, 41, died after being pulled from rushing waters with her 3-year-old daughter clinging to her side on Tuesday in Beaumont. The girl survived. A second woman, who was found on the city's low-lying North End early Wednesday, has not been identified. Rescue teams found a body floating in the 8600 block of Overhill Lane Wednesday evening. Police did not identify the person.
On Tuesday night, Russell Barnes, 51, and Ginger Barnes, 34, both of Alvin, were killed in Jasper County when a tree fell on their truck.
10:15 a.m. Convicts return to 2 prisons near Richmond 
State officials on Monday began returning 1,400 convicts to two prisons near Richmond that were evacuated a week ago because of flooding from Tropical Storm Harvey.
Jason Clark, a spokesman for the Texas Department of Criminal Justice, said transfers of prisoners to the Jester 3 and Vance units began around dawn from prisons in South Texas, after the two lockups near the Brazos River were determined to be safe.
The two prisons had been among five that were evacuated beginning two weeks ago because of record flooding southwest of Houston after Harvey began dumping up to 51 inches of rain on the area as it moved ashore.
More than 5,900 convicts were relocated in secure buses accompanied by correctional officers and other corrections staff. Clark said no decision has been made on when convicts will return to  the three remaining prisons that were evacuated -- Stringfellow, Ramsey and Terrell.
9:55 a.m. Brazos River still high, but retreating
Days after cresting at a record-high water level, the Brazos River has retreated to the moderate flood stage level.
Monday measurements from the National Weather Service show the river at a height of 49.6 feet, a read that puts it just below the major flood stage. 
The river topped 55 feet for the first time ever last week, devastating towns and neighborhoods throughout Fort Bend and Brazoria counties. 
The NWS expects the river's water level will fall into the minor flooding stage by Tuesday, and then rapidly decrease throughout the week. 
9:34 a.m. Man with Alzheimer's reported missing since Friday
A 63-year-old man with early onset Alzheimer's disease has been missing since last week.
The family of James Simmon said he was last seen around 6 p.m. Friday in the 1600 block of Castle Court, in south Montrose.
Simmon is 5'9 and white, with brown hair and blue eyes. He was wearing a yellow plaid shirt, blue jeans and a Houston Astros hat when he was last seen.
Simmon was the Houston Chronicle's political editor from 1990 to 1994 and the editor of the Houston Press from 1994 to 1998, according to his LinkedIn page. He was last the city editor of the Bryan Eagle.
Anyone with information should call Houston Police Department's Missing Persons Unit at 832-394-1840.
9:04 a.m. After reports of scams, Houston police accompany Energy Insights employees
Uniformed first responders will now be accompanying Energy Insights employees as they work to shut off power in flooded homes around Harris County. 
The move, Police Chief Art Acevedo tweeted Sunday, is in response to reports of people impersonating Energy Insights employees. 
"(Legitimate employees) are not shutting off power in houses not flooded," he wrote. "Don't open doors. ... Call 911 if you spot impostors."
8:37 a.m. Fort Bend County ends curfew
Fort Bend County has ended its curfew meant to protect evacuated properties and their owners. 
County Judge Bob Hebert lifted the order Sunday, and also announced that mandatory evacuation orders for districts in the county that operate levees were ended. Such orders are still in effect for some neighborhoods along the Barker Reservoir, and Hebert warned that "individual neighborhoods and homes may still pose hazards" such as "displaced animals, contaminated flood waters and unstable structures."
8:21 a.m. Houston Theater District closes underground parking
The underground parking garages in Houston's Theater District are closed until further notice due to flooding, the Houston First Corporation said Sunday.
"Houston First is assessing damages, and working with contractors to safely and efficiently pump water out of the garages," HFC said in a press release. "Although the pumping process has begun, full restoration of the garages could take weeks."
HFC said it will in the meantime make available 2,000 spaces in other parking facilities nearby. The closed underground parking lots span 18 underground blocks, and have more than 3,350 parking spaces. 
7:49 a.m. Chance of more rain through Wednesday
The Houston area could see more rain and thunderstorms this week, according to the National Weather Service. 
The Labor Day forecast is dry and hot, with highs expected near 90 degrees during the day.
More rain could come Tuesday, according to NWS, with a 20 percent chance of rain and thunderstorms, and a high of 91 degrees. Chances for rain will climb to 40 percent Tuesday evening, and dip down to 20 percent Wednesday.
The forecast for Wednesday night through Sunday is for clear skies, with highs in the high 80s and lows around 60. 
7:45 a.m. Evacuation zone lifted near Crosby chemical plant after 'controlled burn'
A day after a controlled burn destroyed six final trailers of decomposing chemicals, authorities lifted the 1.5-mile evacuation zone around the troubled Arkema chemical plant in Crosby.
The company announced the decision early Monday morning in a press release crediting the Crosby Fire Department and unified command.
"Arkema thanks the unified command for their hard work and professionalism to ensure the safety of all during the post-Hurricane Harvey period," the statement said.
"Arkema will continue to work with its neighbors and the community to recover from the substantial impact of Hurricane Harvey."
SUNDAY, Sept. 3
10:21 p.m.: Gov. Abbott meets with Sen. Cornyn, Reps. McCarthy and McCaul to discuss Harvey 
Elected officials committed themselves to help victims of Harvey at a meeting on Sunday and discussed Congress' response to the storm, Gov. Greg Abbott's office said.
Attendees committed to act "swiftly" to pass a funding measure that would help Texans, a statement read.
Attendees included U.S. Reps. Kevin McCarthy and Michael McCaul.
Monday, Cornyn planned to join House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy and U.S. Reps. Randy Weber and Brian Babin in Beaumont for a briefing from emergency management officials on conditions in that inundated city.
9:17 p.m.: Houston trash pickup requires moving cars
City of Houston officials urged residents to move vehicles, trailers and debris from the roadways as they prepare to pick up trash on Monday.
Crews will begin work at 7 a.m. in Fosters Mill on Monday. A separate convoy will start at Kings Point on 7 a.m. Monday. Additional trucks will move to Kings Point after completing work at Barrington. 
Any trash blocked by a vehicle will not be picked up, city officials said. 
9:08 p.m.: City of contrasts: Some Houston residents in crisis, others find normal
In west Houston late Sunday morning, first responders went door-to-door to ensure people had evacuated homes still flooded more than a week after Hurricane Harvey roared through Texas. At that moment, in a dry neighborhood across town, a few dozen residents were enjoying brunch at Pax Americana: Brisket hash, honey-butter chicken, cold mimosas.
More than a week after the worst disaster in state history, Houston officials and residents began confronting a city of contrasts: Between those spared by Harvey, and those still in crisis. Between aiding people in need, and returning to business as usual. Between starting the rebuilding process, and pausing to reconsider the cost of unmitigated development.
For our full story, click here .
8:40 p.m.: Missing volunteer pulled from Cypress Creek
Nearly four days after Harvey's record flooding slammed a rescue boat into an Interstate 45 frontage road bridge, family members of the final, missing volunteer pulled his body from Cypress Creek in Spring.
Alonso Guillen, a 31-year-old disc jockey from Lufkin, disappeared on Wednesday around midnight along with two friends after their boat hit the bridge over the creek and capsized. One of them was rescued after clinging to a tree in the rushing water, but days later, after the rains let up and the creek level receded, Guillen and Tomas Carreon Jr. were still missing.
For the full story, click here . 
8:21 p.m.:  Mayor Turner: Houston is open for business
In west Houston late Sunday morning, first responders went door-to-door to ensure people had evacuated homes still flooded more than a week after Hurricane Harvey roared through Texas.
More than a week after the worst disaster in state history, Houston officials and residents began confronting a city of contrasts: Between those spared by Harvey, and those still in crisis. Between aiding people in need, and returning to business as usual. Between starting the rebuilding process, and pausing to reconsider the cost of unmitigated development.
A day after issuing a mandatory evacuation order for 300 people in flooded parts of west Houston — one of several areas that are likely to remain inundated for weeks longer — Mayor Sylvester Turner went on national Sunday talk shows with a bullish message for those thinking about visiting his beleaguered city.
"The airport system is up and running. The transit system is up and running. We've started picking up heavy debris," Turner said on CBS' "Face the Nation." "Let me be very, very clear," he added. "The city of Houston is open for business."
8:17 p.m.: Numbers in George R. Brown, NRG Center dwindling
About 1,000 people are living in the George R. Brown Convention Center, and about 2,700 people are in the NRG Center as of Sunday, officials said.
The City of Houston said it aims to relocate the last 1,000 people by the end of the week. 
So far, Harris County officials said, about 2,275 people have been relocated from the NRG Center.
There are 171 volunteers on site, those officials said. 
6:37 p.m.: Fort Bend curfew, evacuation updates
The curfew in the unincorporated areas of Fort Bend County has been lifted, that sheriff's office said at 6:32 p.m. Sunday.
That office also said that the Levee Improvement District evacuation orders have been lifted. The county's Office for Emergency Management warned that there still could be flooded roads, fallen trees, displaced animals and standing water.
Low-lying areas near the Brazos and San Bernard rivers are still under voluntary evacuation. 
"The conditions have improved enough to warrant a cautious lifting of these orders for much of the county," stated Fort Bend County Judge Robert Hebert, who also lifted the county's curfew.
6:30 p.m.: The Red Cross has updated emergency support figures
• Saturday night, at least 32,399 people sought refuge in 226 Red Cross and partner shelters across Texas overnight. The Red Cross is also assisting the Louisiana state government with an emergency shelter which hosted nearly 1,700 people .
• More than 2,700 Red Cross disaster workers are on the ground, and more than 660 are on the way.
• Shelter supplies to support more than 85,000 people are on the ground.
• Along with its partners, Red Cross   served more than a half million (515,000) meals and snacks since the storm began.
5:39 p.m.: Mexican government says Harvey help to arrive by Tuesday
Amb. Carlos Sada, Mexico's undersecretary of foreign Affairs for North America, said Texas officials on Saturday night cleared the way for Mexican relief teams to begin arriving by Tuesday.
"We are ready to jump in and help as soon as possible," Sada said.
The Mexican government will send high-clearance trucks, all-terrain vehicles, cargo aircraft, boats, communications equipment, large generators, mobile community kitchens and a mobile water treatment plant.
For the full story, click here .
5:27: First Disaster Recovery Center opens in Houston
The Federal Emergency Management Agency on Sunday opened its first Disaster Recovery Center in Houston. The center is on the north end of the George R. Brown Convention Center downtown.
The agency is working to identify locations for additional centers, where residents affected by Tropical Storm Harvey can apply for aid, ask questions or resolve problems, said agency spokesman Peter Herrick Jr.
The center at the George R. Brown is open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. daily. Another center opened Sunday  at 1303 W. Gayle St. in the town of Edna, near Victoria southwest of Houston. It's open daily from 7 a.m. to 6 p.m., Herrick said.
5:02 p.m.: Shippin' down from Boston
Nine truckloads of food, formula, toiletries and blankets from the City of Boston will arrive at 9 p.m. at the Houston Food Bank.
Ed Emmett, Harris County Judge, said he would greet the trucks, backed by Marty Walsh, Boston's mayor. 
Boston collected goods from Tuesday through Friday, the city said in a release . 
4:13 p.m.: Last six Arkema chemical containers ignited
Arkema Inc. is igniting the remaining six containers of chemicals at its Crosby plant, a spokeswoman for the Harris County Fire Marshal's office said Sunday afternoon.
She declined to comment on how the company is setting off these six vehicles.
"They've started the operation," spokeswoman Rachel Moreno said.
Crosby residents should expect to see visible smoke around the area, she said. A 1.5-mile radius surrounding the plant has been evacuated.
The fire marshal's office called Arkema's ignition of the containers "a proactive approach to minimize the impacts to the community."
Company officials, who said they made the decision to set off the last six containers, said they believe that the chemicals in the trailers have been decomposing. Without the vehicles catching flames, however, they would not be able to know if the the chemicals are totally neutralized, spokesman Jeff Carr said.
For the full story, click here .
4:04 p.m.: Most Metro HOT lanes open Tuesday
Most HOT lanes managed by Metropolitan Transit Authority will reopen on Tuesday, officials said Sunday.
The one exception will be along Interstate 45, where officials are still evaluating the safety of the lanes.
All park and ride service will also resume after the Labor Day holiday on Monday. Along I-45, service will be detoured, but operational.
As of Sunday, Metro said 70 bus routes are in service, along with most rail service. The Red Line is running along all stops, while Green and Purple line trains are not running through the central business district.
3:26 p.m.: Navajo Nation to distribute supplies
Navajo Nation President Russell Begaye and Vice President Jonathan Nez picked up toiletries, hygiene items, non-perishable food and school supplies at the First Indian Baptist Church of Houston.
They plan to distribute these goods to Navajo families in need. Right now, they're on the way to a Meyerland home, said Mihio Manus, a spokesman.
12:44 p.m.: So much water, it skipped a watershed
Storms and flooding from Harvey became so severe, water on the Colorado River jumped into the neighboring San Bernard watershed, according to the National Weather Service.
As they analyze flows from the rivers and watersheds, officials said Sunday it appeared levels in the Colorado plateaued, as San Bernard levels remained higher than officials predicted. 
The conclusion of researchers was that Colorado water reached the watershed's natural peak and spilled into the San Bernard.
11:36 a.m.: Coast Guard says most ports are open 
Most channels of the ports, including the Galveston Bay Entrance, are now open both day and night, the Coast Guard confirmed Sunday. The Houston Ship Channel is open from the entrance channel to Baytown Highlands, but only for vessels with a maximum 40-foot draft. The Houston Ship Channel above the Baytown Highlands is open to towing vessels transits.
At the Port of Freeport vessels with under a 38-foot draft can arrive during daylight. The Galveston Harbor and Texas City are also open, but only for vessels with a maximum 37-foot draft.
Bolivar Roads Anchorages A, B, and C are open at the pilot's discretion. The Coast Guard warns that there is a short duration use for bunkering and inspections.
11:16 a.m.: FEMA updates relief figures, 37,000 still in shelters
More than 37,000 spent the night in Texas shelters as the state slowly digs out from the fierce storms that flooded neighborhoods and sent thousands scrambling for higher ground.
In a Sunday morning update, FEMA officials said President Donald Trump’s approval of disaster assistance authorized the federal government to pick up 90 percent of the cost of debris removal, something officials anticipate will strain area landfills and heavy haul trucking companies.
In the meantime, the Red Cross and others are caring for evacuees along the Texas coast at more than 270 shelters. FEMA has given Texas over the past days 4.7 meals, 4.3 million liters of water, 13,900 blankets and 13,400 cots. 
10:59 a.m.: Dam releases continuing, with no further home flooding envisioned
Controlled releases continue from Addicks and Barker reservoirs, as city officials tamp down concerns that more homes could flood as waters recede.
A combined 13,300 cubic feet of water is flowing from the two reservoirs each second, according to the Harris County Flood Control District. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is managing the reservoirs.
As a result of the flows, flood control officials said the pools behind Addicks and Barker are shrinking, though it will be up to two weeks before homes impacted are out of the water.
In the meantime, officials do not expect more homes to flood downstream along Buffalo Bayou. City officials called for mandatory evacuations on Saturday, which led some to worry more flooding was imminent.
Houston District G Councilman Greg Travis sent notes Sunday trying to tamp down the concerns.
“Let me make this simple: Do you have standing water in your house? If NO, then your power will NOT be cut and you do NOT have to evacuate this morning,” Travis’ office wrote in a message to residents.
Mayor Sylvester Turner said the evacuations were necessary to ensure safety of residents and first responders. Electricity to the area was being shut off to protect everyone from downed lines. 
10:35 a.m.: First-responders going door-to-door in West Houston mandatory evacuation area
CenterPoint and first responders are walking the flooded areas marked for mandatory evacuation in west Houston to determine where power needs to be shut off. 
The area in question is from State Highway 6 to South Gessner and From Highway 10 south to Briar Forest. Residents in that area who have water in their homes are being asked to evacuate as soon as possible. 
All CenterPoint employees will be accompanied by a law enforcement officer of someone from the fire department.
8:42 a.m.: Officials optimistic and cautious about Harvey rebuild
As Houston dries out, Mayor Sylvester Turner said in a trio of national television appearances he doesn’t want its businesses to dry up.
“The City of Houston is open for business,” Turner told CBS’ Face the Nation host Margaret Brennan.
Municipal workers report back on Tuesday, after the Memorial Day holiday, and Turner said the long rebuilding process will continue as Houston roars back to life.
“I am expecting employers to open and employees to get back to work,” he said.
Turner, however, did not diminish the gravity of what lies ahead. Debris piles the size of railcars must be hauled away from some inundated communities. He told Meet the Press host Chuck Todd that simply cleaning up could take 10 days, while rebuilding is poised to last much longer.
"What we need is rapid repair housing, so people can stay in their homes while they make the bigger repairs,” Turner told Todd.
The rebuild, however, might not be a return to Houston exactly as it has been, according to Gov. Greg Abbott.
“It would be insane for us to rebuild on property that has been flooded multiple times,” Abbott told ABC News’ Martha Raddatz. “ I think everybody probably is in agreement that there are better strategies that we must employ.”
Meanwhile, Abbott, Turner and Texas Sen. Ted Cruz both applauded the way the community pulled together in crisis as they made the television rounds.
“People are hurting,” Cruz told Raddatz. “But in the face of that disaster we have seen incredible bravery.”
7:56 a.m.: Four rescued from fierce Neches River waters
Four boaters stranded without fuel upstream from Beaumont on the Neches River were plucked from the waters by a U.S. Coast Guard recovery team on Saturday night, Jefferson County officials said.
The boaters called emergency dispatchers around 10:45 p.m., saying they believed they were about five or six miles upstream from Beaumont’s Riverfront Park, tied off to a tree. A Coast Guard helicopter spotted the four, and sent a swift water rescue team to their location to pick them up.
“The Neches River is still a danger for boaters,” the Jefferson County Sheriff’s Office said in a release. “The current is swift and turbulent.  That coupled with floating debris makes it very hazardous.”
SATURDAY, Sept. 2
11:50 p.m. Mail delivery resumes in some neighborhoods
The U.S. Postal Service is trying to get back to normal delivery in Houston. But first, it'll deliver some mail on Sunday. 
The Oak Forest post office, at 2499 Judiway, will resume delivery to Oak Forest residents on Sunday after a several-day interruption. At first, door-to-door service will include just the most urgent mail: checks and medications.
In other neighborhoods, the post office still isn't able to deliver. But about three dozen post offices are now open 10 a.m.-6 p.m. daily (including weekends) so residents can pick up U.S. Treasury checks and "identifiable medications." Customers must present proper ID to receive items. Get the full list of pickup stations here . 
10:20 p.m. Fort Bend County lifts mandatory evacuation for some areas in Barker Reservoir 
Some residents can reenter their homes near the Barker Reservoir in Fort Bend County, while others are still under a mandatory evacuation order.
For a list of which areas no longer are under mandatory evacuation, click here .
County officials caution that even though the evacuation order is lifted, returning may not be safe.
"Many neighborhoods within the Barker Reservoir area may still have hazards present such as flooded roads, fallen trees, displaced animals, and standing water," the county said in a statement Saturday evening. "Residents should use extreme caution when returning to their homes."
9:20 p.m. Harris County to help residents test well water
Harris County plans to help residents test private water wells for contamination in Tropical Storm Harvey's aftermath.
Floodwaters harbor bacteria, fungi, viruses and other contaminants that could have infiltrated private water wells. Water should be tested and chlorinated before drinking, county officials say.
Starting Tuesday, residents can pick up bottles to collect samples and have them tested at 11 locations around the county.
A list of locations can be found here .
8:30 p.m. Harvey victim found dead floating in Cypress Creek
Tomas Carreon-Esquivel, 25, became the 29th flood victim confirmed by the Harris County medical examiner.
Carreon-Esquivel's body was found floating in Cypress Creek, according to the medical examiner.
Officials estimate Carreon-Esquivel died on Friday at around 1:15 p.m. His body was found around 22411 Greenbrook Drive.
More than 50 people - including a veteran Houston police officer - have died or are feared dead in the Houston area and beyond in flooding or circumstances connected to Tropical Storm Harvey, according to local officials.
Our staff has the full story here .
7:30 p.m. Harris County flood control officials: no more uncontrolled releases from Addicks, Barker
Water is no longer spilling out of the north side of Addicks reservoir, Harris County Flood Control District Officials said Saturday.
That means flooding near Eldridge Parkway and Tanner Road from the uncontrolled releases is decreasing.
Meanwhile, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is still releasing about 13,300 cubic feet per second of water from Addicks and Barker reservoirs. This has been largely the same for days.
Water from Tropical Storm Harvey pooling in the reservoirs has caused widespread flooding upstream, while releases contributed to flooding of thousands of homes along Buffalo Bayou.
Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner called for a mandatory evacuation of west Houston homes that are inundated.
7:15 p.m. Harris County ramps up debris collection
People who live in unincorporated Harris County and need help with debris removal or repairs to their homes can call a hotline with questions: (713) 274-3880.
The hotline can help people answer questions about debris removal, permits needed to repair or rebuild homes or other buildings, and other general questions about basic needs.
"The major goal of the Harris County Residential Debris and Damage Assessment Hotline is to ensure that public roads and other infrastructure do not pose an immediate threat to public safety," the county stated in a news release Saturday. "Harris County Residential Debris and Damage Assessment teams are currently working to conduct safety and damage assessments, while clearing debris from public roads in areas where flood waters have receded."
6:15 p.m. FEMA registration applications top half a million
The Federal Emergency Management Agency has received more than 507,000 applications for aid in the aftermath of Hurricane Harvey.
FEMA has approved $114.7 million in aid to 161,000 people so far. About $33.6 million is for assistance with housing, such as paying displaced victims' rent, and $81 million will help victims replace personal property, pay for transportation, as well as medical and dental assistance.
5:40 p.m. Mayor Sylvester Turner orders mandatory evacuation of West Houston homes flooded by Buffalo Bayou and dam releases
Mayor Sylvester Turner ordered a mandatory evacuation of an area of West Houston which has been inundated by high waters on Buffalo Bayou.
The order affects areas of Houston south of I-10, north of Briarforest, east of Addicks and Barker reservoirs and west of Gessner.
About 300 people are believed to be in the area, which includes approximately 4,000 homes.
That part of Houston will likely be underwater for weeks as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers releases water from the Addicks and Barker reservoirs to empty them out in case they need to hold back water from future rains.
Our Ileana Najarro has the full story here .
5:20 p.m. Kingwood High School closed for foreseeable future, students to attend Summer Creek High
The Humble Independent School District said that students attending Kingwood High School will have to attend Summer Creek High School while the district attempts to restore Kingwood High from Hurricane Harvey damage. 
"This will require a modified schedule," said spokesperson Jamie Mount. "Humble ISD has asked for families and staff to share input through a survey on scheduling options."
Mount said Kingwood high could be closed for the entire 2017-18 school year -- though it could open sooner if restoration work is completed.
"Under normal circumstances, we would never ask two large high schools to coexist under one roof," Mount said. "Unfortunately, Hurricane Harvey took away normal."
4:15 p.m. Harris County homeowners can report damage to decrease home appraisals
The Harris County Appraisal district is encouraging homeowners to report damage from Hurricane Harvey so residents can lower their property tax bill.
The district said homeowners can report damage through the "HCAD app," which can be downloaded on iPhone, iPad or Android phones.
Residents can also report damage by calling (713) 821-5805, or emailing help@hcad.org. HCAD asks residents to provide name, address, phone number, account number and inches or feet of water that flooded victims' homes.
"The appraisal district can use this information to identify the most damaged neighborhoods and properties to help the homeowner next year when the property is reappraised January 1 by possibly reducing the value because of existing damage or ongoing repair work," said Roland Altinger, chief appraiser at HCAD.
4:00 p.m. City of Houston warns victims of insurance fraud
Houston officials said scammers are robo-calling flood victims and telling them they may not get covered for Hurricane Harvey damage unless they pay "past due" premiums.
City officials say this is a scam, and that real warnings come between 30 and 90 days before an insurance company rescinds coverage.
"Insurance companies and agents selling flood insurance policies do NOT use this process to communicate with customers about their flood insurance policies," officials said in a release.
The officials said victims receiving these robo-calls should call their insurance companies or the National Flood Insurance Program at 1-800-638-6620.
3:50 p.m. PetWell Partners to offer free vet services after Harvey 
When PetWell Partners reopened its Bellaire clinic just a few days after Tropical Storm Harvey swept the region, David Strauss realized the toll the storm had taken on hundreds of desperate pet owners.
The co-founder of the company met a couple whose dog had been having seizures for three days. At one point, they brought it to a fire station to get oxygen, Strauss said.
"It's crazy," he said. "There are so many good people trying to help."
PetWell Partners, which reopened eight of its animal clinics throughout the Houston area, will offer free services and supplies for pets sickened or injured during the storm. Starting Monday, vets will provide basic screening and treatments at certain locations.
Our Katherine Blunt has the full story here . 
3:20 p.m. James Harden of the Houston Rockets announces $1 million donation for relief
Chants of "Houston! Houston! Houston!" erupted in Hall E of the George R. Brown Convention Center Saturday when James Harden of the Houston Rockets strode in with Mayor Sylvester Turner at his side. The basketball star announced he would donate $1 million to Harvey relief.
"I am thankful for this guy right here," Turner said.
As Harden walked through the center-turned-shleter, fans ran up to him, taking selfies, getting autographs and receiving fist bumps.
"It's the first time I've seen you in person James, but I love you," a woman shouted as the star signed her pocket notebook.
3:15 p.m. Six-month-old infant swept away in Harvey floodwaters
Authorities in Walker County confirmed Saturday that a six-month-old baby was missing and had been swept away in gushing floodwaters on August 27.
Firefighters had working to to rescue two men trapped in their pickup in the swollen waters of Winters Bayou on Highway 150 near New Waverly and Coldspring, and heard screams nearby.
First responders found a couple up a tree, seeking refuge from the water. They had been fleeing Houston flooding, heading for Louisiana, said Jimmy Williams, with the New Waverly Fire Department.
They became trapped in high water on Highway 150, and had to flee their pickup.
"The current was so fast, it ripped the baby out of their arms," Williams said. "So the baby was lost."
Our St. John Barned-Smith has the full story here . 
3:oo p.m. President Trump leaves Houston
President Donald Trump left Houston after meeting residents sheltered at NRG Center. 
He arrived Saturday morning to meet with members of the Texas Delegation at Ellington Field Joint Reserve Base. He is expected to meet with members of the Louisiana Delegation and emergency response teams in Louisiana this afternoon.
1:15 p.m. Oil and gas workers reboard offshore rigs in Gulf of Mexico
Oil and gas workers are reboarding offshore platforms and rigs in the Gulf of Mexico to assess damages after Tropical Storm Harvey.
On Saturday, personnel had returned to all five rigs evacuated during the storm. About 6 percent of 737 stationary production platforms remained evacuated. 
The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement is inspecting offshore facilities and monitoring efforts to restart production operations. It has not yet received any damage reports.
1:00 p.m. Church holds benefit for Saldivar family 
By the time the flood waters receded and the white van reappeared, Virginia Saldivar was already expecting the worst.
But Saldivar, the grandmother of the four children who drowned in Greens Bayou and daughter in law of the the elderly couple in the van, will cherish her memories of the children as their short lives drew to a tragic end.
Belia and Manuel Saldivar, ages 81 and 84, were found in the front seats. The bodies of their four great-grandchildren -- ages 16, 14, 8 and 6 -- were found in the rear of the van.
"They were our life," Saldivar said. "That's what we're remembering — how wonderful they were."
A benefit was held Saturday at the Iglesia Cristiana Principe de Paz for the family of the six victims who were trapped in flood waters on Greens River Road.
The community room of the church filled with friends, extended family and members of the community coming together to show support for a family devastated by the flood that's taken over 50 lives.
"We want everyone to know that we're very thankful for all the love and support," Saldivar said. "It's really and truly been overwhelming."
12:50: Humble ISD announces back-to-school date
Humble ISD will reopen for the first day of school Sept. 7.
Kingwood High School and Summer Creek High School will reopen Sept. 11 because of the damage they sustained after the storm.
Staff members are required to report to work Sept. 5. 
12:35 p.m. Last cruise stuck at sea due to Harvey makes port
For the more than 3,000 passengers aboard the Carnival Breeze, an extra week at sea due to Harvey's wrath ended on a steamy Saturday morning in Galveston.
The Breeze was the last of four ships to dock in the Port of Galveston's cruise terminal after being turned away last week as Harvey strengthened from a tropical storm to a hurricane. The cruise was originally supposed to end Sunday, and was given clearance to dock early Saturday.
Our Marialuisa Rincon has the full story  here .
12:20 p.m. HISD offers more details on damages and displacement
Houston ISD officials said they've surveyed 245 schools as of early Saturday, with plans to reach the roughly 35 remaining campuses. About 200 schools had standing water, with 53 suffering "major" damage and 22 receiving "extensive" damage, which is more severe, Chief Operating Officer Brian Busby said.
Some schools may never be inhabitable again, Superintendent Richard Carranza said, but it's too early to make that judgment.
Carranza said a decision about relocating students to other campuses will be made no earlier than Tuesday. He's exploring the possibility of "double shifts" at some campuses, with students from one school attending classes in the morning to early afternoon, and students from another school coming into the same building for classes from early afternoon to evening.
Our Jacob Carpenter has the full story here .
12:15 p.m. President Trump arrives at NRG Center
President Donald Trump and Texas Governor Greg Abbott arrived at NRG Center Saturday to visit with those affected by the storm. 
Read more here . 
12:10 p.m. Cy-Fair ISD delays start of school to Sept. 11
Cypress-Fairbanks ISD has delayed the start of school from Sept. 6 to Sept. 11 because several campuses face sewage issues, Superintendent Mark Henry said in an announcement. 
'This is a dynamic situation," he said. "It is difficult to predict other issues we may face in the coming weeks."
Staff will report to work Sept. 7.
The district we have extended its free meal program at Holbrook and Owens elementary schools and Cypress Lakes High School through Sept. 10. 
12:05 p.m. Brazoria County issues mandatory evacuations
Brazoria County has issued a mandatory evacuation order for areas where that action had been voluntary. The order includes most areas west of State Highway 288.
Noon: Parents arrive to Carrillo Elementary School to feed their children
Deimin Ramirez, 28, tapped the wooden cafeteria table.
"Eat the pear too," she ordered her 7 and 5-year-old.
Ramirez was the first mother at Carrillo Elementary School Saturday morning receiving a free hot lunch for herself and her three daughters as part of a new HISD effort that launched Saturday to aid Harvey victims.
The brisket sandwiches, mashed potatoes and diced pears were a welcomed reprieve from the few beans and rice the Ramirez family subsisted on for days.
The remaining food stamps in her possession were barely enough for Ramirez to shop at the nearby Fiesta Mart, which itself had been running low on supplies for the storm's duration.
"They were hungry," Ramirez said of her daughters, as she uncapped a water bottle for her 2-year-old.
Water seeped into their one bedroom apartment a few blocks away from the school, but the only damage sustained was a soaked living room carpet that has already been torn out.
Structural damage to their house during Hurricane Ike forced the family  to move into an apartment with a more manageable rent. Last year they moved again, this time into the apartments surrounding Fiesta and the school.
School officials put out calls to neighboring families in both English and Spanish announcing the free breakfast, lunch, and dinner available this weekend. Concerned some may have lost power and therefore missed the phone call, staff members printed out flyers on Saturday to deliver door-to-door.
As her girls wiped gravy off their mouths with the back of their hands, Ramirez called up a couple of her neighbors letting them know the school had food.
She packed up the leftovers--mostly pears--as she headed out to search for any milk at Fiesta.
"They're used to milk in the morning," Ramirez said. "We didn't have any since Saturday."
11:45 a.m. H-E-B resumes normal business hours at many Houston stores
Fifty-one H-E-B stores resumed normal hours Saturday as the company worked to restock its chain with essentials. 
About 30 stores, including the Gulfgate, Bay City, Grand Parkway, Dairy Ashford, Friendswood and Lake Jackson locations, will keep modified hours through Sunday. All will close at 6 p.m. or later. Some will stay open until 10 or 11 p.m.
Four locations remained closed: Braeswood/Chimney Rock, Kingwood, Orange and Joe V's Smart Shop in Wallisville.
11:20: President Trump touches down at Ellington Field
President Donald Trump and First Lady Melania Trump touched down in Houston at Ellington Field with plans to meet residents affected by the storm and visit a relief shelter. 
11:00 a.m. City of Houston asks some residents to refrain from normal water use
The West District and Turkey Creek wastewater treatment plants have flooded, and the City of Houston has asked residents in those area to refrain from flushing and using extra water to clean, shower or bathe until further notice. It's working to make repairs.
The following zip codes are affected: 77024, 77041, 77043, 77055, 77077, 77079, 77080 and 77094.
10:50 a.m. Houston ISD outlines widespread damage and student displacement
Houston ISD Superintendent Richard Carranza said at a Saturday press conference there is a small chance the district will delay the start of school later than Sept. 11, but it's working to resume operations by then.
He said as many as 12,000 students will need to be temporarily relocated from damaged schools, some of which won't open for months. The district does not yet have a list of those schools.
10:05 a.m. Coast Guard continues rescue efforts in Port Arthur
The Coast Guard dispatched more than 200 personnel on Saturday to aid the Port Arthur area.
It deployed 27 shallow-draft vessels, which are capable of operating in flooded urban areas. Responders there have rescued more than 490 people and 155 pets in the past 24 hours.
9:45 a.m. Houston activists organize Trump protest
The Houston Socialist Movement and other organizations are planning to protest President Donald Trump when he visits a local relief center at noon. The location has not been disclosed.
In a statement, the activists said they plan to "send a powerful message of opposition to the President and the white supremacists and misogynists who support him." 
9:30 a.m. Cy-Fair ISD offers free meals before reopening
Cypress-Fairbanks ISD is offering free meals for children and accompanying adults Sept. 2-4 at Owens and Holbrook elementary schools and Cypress Lakes High School. Food will be served from 8 a.m. to 2 p.m.
The school district will reopen Sept. 6. The USDA has waived all free and reduced meal eligibility requirements through the end of the month.
9:00 a.m. Houston firefighters respond to house fire near Memorial
Houston firefighters are battling a one-alarm fire at a house on Whitewing Lane south of Memorial Drive. Flames have breached the roof in multiple places.
The department has also responded to a one-alarm fire at a house on Frey Road near Edgebrook. 
8:15 a.m. Meteorologists expect almost no rain Labor Day weekend 
Space City Weather's latest forecast anticipates warm, sunny weather with almost no chance of rain in the Houston area this weekend. Early next week, a cool front might increase the chance of rain, but it's not expected to accumulate. 
The forecast anticipates that Hurricane Irma, now brewing in the Atlantic Ocean, will turn north before moving into the Gulf of Mexico later next week. 
7:40 a.m. President Trump to meet with Harvey victims in Houston
 President Donald Trump and First Lady Melania Trump will arrive in Texas Saturday morning to meet individuals affected by the storm, visit a relief center and meet with members of the Texas Delegation at Ellington Field Joint Reserve Base in Texas. They will also meet with members of the Louisiana Delegation and emergency response teams in Louisiana this afternoon. They visited Corpus Christi and Austin earlier this week. 
6:35 a.m. Trump announces Sunday as National Day of Prayer for Harvey
Trump announced Sunday would be a National Day of Prayer for Hurricane Harvey victims, national responders and recovery efforts, according to a press release from the White House.
"I urge Americans of all faiths and religious traditions and backgrounds to offer prayers today for all those harmed by Hurricane Harvey, including people who have lost family members or been injured, those who have lost homes or other property, and our first responders, law enforcement officers, military personnel, and medical professionals leading the response and recovery efforts," the statement read. 
6:15 a.m. Benefit to be held for family of 6 who died during Harvey 
