AEP Texas Hurricane Harvey restoration update for Sunday evening
Posted:
Updated:
AEP Texas has crews from all over the United States helping to restore power here in the Coastal Bend.
Restoration of electric service by AEP Texas crews continued Sunday afternoon in the aftermath of Hurricane Harvey. Of the approximately 5,600 total personnel involved in the restoration effort, more than 1,000 workers are now working in the Aransas Pass and Port Aransas areas. 
Customers in the Port Aransas area who have already had their power restored likely will see electric service interrupted from 7 p.m. until 9 p.m. Sunday evening.  The service interruption will allow AEP Texas crews to make some repairs and move forward with the restoration of power. Taking this step will ensure safety of the crews as they work for complete restoration of service to homes and businesses that can take power.
AEP Texas has restored service in the City of Corpus Christi, as well as the Sinton, Beeville and Kenedy areas, to all customers who lost service as a result of the storm and whose home or business can take power. AEP Texas continues its work on a process to help identify homes and business that sustained severe damage and may not be able to take power. Crews also continue to restore electricity to customers who lost service due to reasons other than the storm.
AEP Texas will continue efforts to restore power to all remaining customers without electricity in all areas impacted by the storm. 
As of 4:30 p.m. on Sunday, AEP Texas crews have restored electric service to 178,000 of the 220,000 customers who lost power as a result of Hurricane Harvey. 
Outage Update
Shown below are the latest outage numbers listed by the area where the highest number of outages remain: 
Aransas Pass – Rockport Area       30,450
Victoria                                              5,400
Port Lavaca - Refugio Area               6,900
Estimated Time of Restoration (ETR)
Following are projected ETRs for these communities:
Port Lavaca               Mon., Sept. 4, 10 p.m.
Victoria:                      Sun., Sept. 3, 10 p.m.
Ingleside:                   Wed., Sept. 6, 10 p.m.
Rockport -Fulton:       Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.
Port Aransas:            Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.              
Rockport:                   Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.
Aransas Pass:           Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.
Refugio                      Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.
Woodsboro                Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.
Tivoli                          Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.
Austwell                     Fri., Sept. 8, 10 p.m.
The ETR for any city not listed above is 10 p.m. on Friday, Sept. 8, if not sooner.
Additional facts from the morning update
Hurricane Harvey, the largest storm to hit the AEP Texas service territory in 44 years, knocked down approximately 5,000 distribution poles and 300 transmission structures.  The Category 4 hurricane also damaged an additional 200 transmission structures.
This past week, crews used the same amount of materials that would be needed to build a power line from Corpus Christi to San Antonio.  Over the next two weeks, the amount of materials used would be the equivalent of building a Corpus Christi to San Antonio power line two more times.
AEP Texas continues to use specialized equipment including cranes and all-terrain vehicles such as “swamp buggies” and track vehicles in support of traditional restoration activities.
Public Safety
AEP Texas reminds customers: Do not approach crews while they are working to restore power. Such actions are very unsafe and can cause distractions leading to accidents and injuries. Also, interrupting crews while they are working slows down the restoration process.
Please continue to consider all downed power lines as energized and dangerous. Please report downed power lines and other safety hazards like broken poles to AEPTexas.com or by calling (866) 223-8508.
Additionally, AEP Texas asks all consumers who are currently using generators to follow all safety precautions from the manufacturer. Generators should never be used inside the home.
Lastly, as power is being restored to customers around the area, residents are reminded to clear cooktops and electric stoves of any debris; and ovens should be turned off.
Outage map
Customers can track progress on the restoration effort by visiting the outage map at  www.aeptexas.com.  It features the most current available information. Customers also can sign up for outage alerts to receive updates via text or email. 
Reading on your phone? Download the KRIS 6 News Mobile App for iOS/iPhone  here  and for Android  here .
WEATHER
