‘We dodged a big bullet’
Live Oak, McMullen counties largely spared from Hurricane Harvey’s fury
Email
Members of the Three Rivers Bulldogs football team and patrons of Momentum Fitness Thursday sprang into action to help Three Rivers public works employees to fill sandbags ahead of the approaching hurricane. The sandbags were distributed at no charge to homes and businesses within Three Rivers.
Buy Now
Mayor Andy Garza of George West listens as Mayor Sammy Garcia of Three Rivers outlines some of the emergency preparations occurring in his city Thursday in the hours leading up to Hurricane Harvey's impending landfall during a joint emergency meeting between George West city officials and the city council, Garcia, Live Oak County Judge Jim Huff, Sheriff Larry Busby and Emergency Management Cooordinator Gene Chapline.
Save
Residents of Live Oak and McMullen counties are thankful that they were spared the brunt of Hurricane Harvey.
The storm, which on Friday night, made landfall near Rockport as a Category 4 hurricane packing winds in excess of 130 mph, pummeled the Coastal Bend region including the cities of Victoria, Corpus Christi and Houston throughout the weekend. 
According to the National Weather Service Monday, Harvey – now a tropical storm – was making a slow southeastward track toward the Gulf of Mexico. Potential remained for an additional 2-4 inches of rain from Seadrift to Cuero.
Precipitation was problematic for areas in and around Houston. The weather service reported that on Sunday, Houston Intercontinental Airport recorded 16.07 inches of rain – shattering a 72-year-old single-day record of 8.32 inches.
But the situation was quite different in The Progress’ readership area of Live Oak and McMullen counties. Despite initial weather service estimates of 15-20 inches of rain, 30 inches in some isolated areas, the actual total was nothing close. On the average, McMullen County Judge Jim Teal said Harvey brought his county roughly 1 1/2 inches of rain.
McMullen County
Like others in our area, McMullen County was prepared for the worst. A shelter was set up at the McMullen County Volunteer Fire Department, where a few local residents joined sheriff’s deputies, firefighters, EMTs and their families Friday night. All emergency personnel remained on duty throughout the storm.
“There was no power loss, no damage,” Teal said.
Live Oak County
Areas in and around Three Rivers and George West did, however, lose power. 
Service for roughly 20 percent of Three Rivers, mainly  along the state Highway 72, was out Friday night and into Saturday afternoon, said Three Rivers Mayor Sammy Garcia. Among those without power was the Three Rivers Nursing Home – which was getting by on small generators and no air conditioning. Despite this, electrical supplier AEP Texas initially said it would be Sunday at the earliest before service was restored.
“Through the efforts of (County) Judge (Jim) Huff, myself, and other people, we were able to get AEP out here sooner,” Garcia said.
By about 3 p.m.,  Huff had said a majority of the customers again had electricity. However, sporadic outages in George West and in the lake areas remained until late Sunday afternoon, which resulted in school being cancelled Monday for students in the George West Independent School District.
In both cities, shelters were established for residents whose houses would not be sturdy enough to withstand Harvey’s forecasted brunt. By 6:30 p.m. Saturday, the shelter in the Three Rivers Junior/Senior High School Student Activities Center and in the George West ISD’s old gymnasium were closed, as Harvey started heading east toward Victoria.
Live Oak County Emergency Management Coordinator Gene Chapline said the county government did not provide a shelter for residents or for those passing through. This is because, due to being unable to meet various federal regulations, Live Oak County is not designated as a sheltering county but as a “pass-through county.” 
But locally, Chapline and others were pleased at the level of coordination among various departments. George West City Manager Georgia Vines echoed those sentiments when she praised her staff for its preparation beforehand and dedication throughout the storm event. Public works crews cleaned culverts and ditches so that they would accommodate the anticipated rainfall and barriers were installed in just two floodprone areas at the height of the storm.
“We were very blessed,” she said. “Everything worked well for us.”
George West residents with storm debris, such as branches or brush, are asked to gather the items at the curbside as city workers will come to pick  them up later this week. Vines cautioned against placing furniture and other bulk-trash items, as a bulk cleanup is planned for October.
Chapline said he has heard no reports of storm-related damage and indications are that less than 3.4 inches of rain fell.
“We dodged a big bullet,” he said.
The county’s emergency center was up and running, with HAM radio operators at the ready to distribute information if  telephone or fiber optic lines were damaged.
Helping others
Now that Live Oak County is able to move on relatively unscathed, the focus is to help those who are not so fortunate. Huff said Refugio County, where many homes and businesses were damaged, will still be able to pay its workers because paychecks this week will be run through Live Oak County’s Treasurer’s Office.
Area benevolent organizations and churches are organizing donation drives and workdays. The Progress will distribute that information as it becomes available.
