Port Aransas ferries damaged by Harvey
Posted:
Hurricane Harvey damaged two of the seven ferries that run between Port Aransas and Aransas Pass.
PORT ARANSAS -
There are only two ways to Port Aransas: Highway 361 and the ferry crossing. Hurricane Harvey did a number on hundreds of boats and ships, and that includes the Port Aransas ferries. 
Seven ferries run between Aransas Pass and Port Aransas. During the storm, two of them became pinned in the loading dock. 
The Texas Department of Transportation and the Coast Guard are working to see how they can best remove the vessels without causing further damage and without polluting the water.
"Pollution is always a factor with sunken vessels. Currently right now there is fuel and oil on board," said Lt. Vince Carreon, a Coast Guard Marine Inspector who overseas domestic vessels. "That's going to be one of the major concerns with the salvage operations and the recovery operations for the ferries."
Carreon says it could be months before the two ferries can run again. 
"The are going to get pulled off in whatever means gets deemed necessary, and they're going to need to go in dry dock," he said. "They are Coast Guard inspected vessels, and we're going to have to do a damage survey and determine whether or not they're suitable to return to service. Our own family members can ride these boats, school children, tourists, and we want to make sure that the inspection process is done to the best of our ability and it's perfect every time."
Three landings in Port Aransas and one on Harbor Island were also damaged and will require commercial repairs. All  building structures received damage to roofs which led to flooding, according to TxDOT spokesman Rickey Dailey.
"Hurricane Harvey damaged every aspect of TxDOT's Port Aransas ferry operations," Daily said. "The system is currently in service under generator power for buildings, dispatch, and landings."
Right now TxDOT is operating the other ferries in a limited capacity. They are only transporting first responders, law enforcement, employees of utilities companies, and large equipment needed in Port Aransas for hurricane recovery. 
"Numerous employees lost their homes and property, so schedules for boats and service will be based on availability of our personnel," Dailey said. 
It is unknown how long it will take for the ferries to open the Corpus Christi ship channel to the public again. The decision will be made by the Coast Guard captain of the Port, TxDOT, and the City of Port Aransas. 
WEATHER
