Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Quintin Sanders is carried to dry land by volunteer rescuers after his neighborhood was inundated with the flooding of Hurricane Harvey on Aug. 31, 2017 in Beaumont, TX. 
Joe Raedle, Getty Images
Volunteer rescuer workers help a woman from her home that was inundated with the flooding of Hurricane Harvey on Aug. 30, 2017 in Port Arthur, TX.  
Joe Raedle, Getty Images
A rescue worker carries an evacuee to dry land after she was rescued from the flooding in Port Arthur, TX, Aug. 30. 2017. 
Joe Raedle, Getty Images
First responders and volunteers help to evacuate the Gulf Health Care Center, a nursing home in Port Arthur, Texas. 
Nick Oza, The Arizona Republic, via USA TODAY Newtwork
Michael Boyd passes his son Skylar over to a rescue worker as they are evacuated on an airboat from their apartment complex after it was inundated with water following Hurricane Harvey on Aug. 30, 2017 in Houston. 
Scott Olson, Getty Images
John Paul Klotz, 80, is pulled on a boat by U.S. Border Patrol Agents Steven Blackburn, left, Ramiro Rodriguez, top center, and Juan Flores during a search a rescue operation in Houston, Aug. 30, 2017. 
LM Otero, AP
Volunteers help pull a rescue boat in from sweeping currents in floodwaters in the aftermath of Harvey in Beaumont, TX Aug. 30, 2017. 
Ryan Pelham, The Beaumont Enterprise via AP
A woman is evacuated on a canoe as people escape flood waters in Lakeside Estate in Houston, Aug. 30, 2017.  
Thomas B. Shea, AFP/Getty Images
Fullscreen
Houston Police SWAT officer Daryl Hudeck carries Catherine Pham and her 13-month-old son Aiden after rescuing them from their home surrounded by floodwaters from Tropical Storm Harvey on Aug. 27, 2017, in Houston. The remnants of Hurricane Harvey sent devastating floods pouring into Houston Sunday as rising water chased thousands of people to rooftops or higher ground. 
David J. Phillip, AP
Sheriff's Deputy Rick Johnson carries 2 children from heavy flooding 8/27/2017. A  colleague snapped this photo as Tropical Storm Harvey slammed into the Houston area.  
Harris County Sherrif's Office
Residents begin to return to their homes in north Houston as floodwaters began to recede following Hurricane Harvey on Aug. 30, 2017.  
Win McNamee, Getty Images
Wilford Martinez, right, is rescued from his flooded car by Harris County Sheriff's Department Richard Wagner in Houston, Aug. 27, 2017.  
David J. Phillip, AP
Lauren Durst holds onto her 10-month-old son, Wyatt, as they evacuate from their home in Houston, Aug. 29, 2017.  
Michael Ciaglo, Houston Chronicle via AP
Sgt. Chad Watts, of the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries, holds Madelyn Nguyen, 2, after he rescued her and her family by boat from floodwaters of Tropical Storm Harvey Aug. 28, 2017.  
Gerald Herbert, AP
A man carries a girl after being evacuated from their home as floodwaters from Tropical Storm Harvey rise Aug. 28, 2017, in Houston.  
David J. Phillip, AP
A rescuer moves Paulina Tamirano, 92, from a boat to a truck bed as people evacuate from rising waters from Tropical Storm Harvey Aug. 29, 2017, in Houston.  
Michael Ciaglo, Houston Chronicle via AP
A volunteer carries a woman whose home was impacted by severe flooding following Hurricane Harvey in north Houston on Aug. 29, 2017, in Houston. 
Win McNamee, Getty Images
Texas Army National Guard members Sergio Esquivel, left, and Ernest Barmore carry 81-year-old Ramona Bennett after she and other residents were rescued from their Pine Forest Village neighborhood due to high water from Hurricane Harvey Aug. 29, 2017, in Houston. 
Erich Schlegel, Getty Images
Volunteers and first responders help flood victims evacuate to shelters in Houston. 
Scott Clause, The Advertiser via USATODAY Network
Naomi Coto carries Simba on her shoulders as they evacuate their home after the area was flooded by Hurricane Harvey on Aug. 27, 2017, in Houston. 
Joe Raedle, Getty Images
Fullscreen
Precinct 6 Deputy Constables Sgt. Paul Fernandez, from left, Sgt. Michael Tran and Sgt. Radha Patel rescue an elderly woman from rising water on North MacGregor Way, near Brays Bayou, after heavy rains from the remnants of Hurricane Harvey on Aug. 27, 2017. 
Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle via AP
Like this topic? You may also like these photo galleries:
Replay
