Capital Weather Gang's Angela Fritz explains why Harvey will have an effect for days after making landfall on the Texas coast. (Claritza Jimenez,Angela Fritz/The Washington Post)
(This article was last updated Friday evening.)
Harvey made landfall as an extremely powerful Category 4 hurricane at 11 p.m. Friday between Port Aransas and Port O’Connor, Texas. Packing 130 mph winds, the storm became the first major hurricane, rated Category 3 or higher ( on the 1-5 Saffir-Simpson intensity scale ), to strike U.S. soil in 12 years.
At 11 p.m. Friday, Harvey was centered about 30 miles east-northeast of Corpus Christi, tracking toward the northwest at 8 mph. A weather station at Aransas Pass – northeast of Corpus Christi and within storm’s eyewall, reported sustained winds up to 111 mph and gusts to 131 mph in the previous hour. In Rockport, Tex., the National Weather Service logged reports indicating “numerous structures destroyed”, and “buildings collapsed with people trapped inside”. The full extent of the damage will not be known until daylight.
Link: Long radar loop of Hurricane Harvey
In addition to damaging winds, the National Hurricane Center said it expects “catastrophic and life-threatening” flash flooding along the middle and upper Texas coast. An incredible amount of rain, 15 to 30 inches with isolated amounts of up to 40 inches, is predicted because the storm is expected to stall and unload torrents for four to six straight days. In just a few days, the storm may dispense the amount of rain that normally falls over an entire year, shattering records.
“Let’s set the expectations: Texas is about to have a very significant disaster,” said Brock Long, FEMA administrator.
[ Your questions about Hurricane Harvey, answered. ]
The storm is also predicted to generate a devastating storm surge — or raise the water as much as 13 feet above normally dry land at the coast.
“In all these years, it’s rare that I’ve seen a hurricane threat that concerns me as much as this one does,” said Rick Knabb , hurricane expert at the Weather Channel and former director of the National Hurricane Center.
The National Weather Service office in Corpus Christi, near where the storm is expected to make landfall, said that due to the combination of flooding from storm surge and rainfall, “locations may be uninhabitable for an extended period.” It warned of “structural damage to buildings, with many washing away” and that “streets and parking lots become rivers of raging water with underpasses submerged.”
[ Hurricane Harvey grows stronger as Texas braces for historic storm to make landfall Friday evening ]
Satellite images show Harvey's outer rain bands moving over the Texas coast on Aug. 25. (NOAA)
Hurricane, storm surge and flood warnings plastered coastal and inland portions of East Texas Friday evening, and tropical-storm-force winds are forecast to spread well into the interior of Texas Friday night.
(National Hurricane Center)
The five-day “cone of uncertainty,” an illustration of where the storm may track, is squashed down to a circle, indicating that the storm is expected to stall, unleashing its wrath over the same general area through the middle of next week.
(National Hurricane Center)
Until Harvey, Texas had not been hit by a hurricane since 2008 , when Ike crashed ashore near Galveston as a Category 2 storm. Harvey brings together some of the worst aspects of three recent Texas hurricanes wrapped into one: Ike’s devastating storm surge, the destructive winds of Category 4 Hurricane Bret in 1999 and the disastrous rains of Tropical Storm Allison in 2001.
Harvey could be a storm Texans remember for many years to come. It became the first Category 4 storm to hit the state since Carla in 1961, and the first in the U.S. since Charley in 2004.
[ How to prepare for Hurricane Harvey — whether you evacuate or not ]
The rain
The rain forecasts are extremely ominous. “Somebody is going to get a rainstorm to tell their grandkids about,” said Bill Read, a former director of the National Hurricane Center.
Areas along the middle and upper Texas coast may see 15 to 30 inches of rain, with a few areas receiving as much as 40 inches, although it is impossible to pinpoint exactly where the heaviest rain will fall.
“Millions of people from Corpus Christi to Houston will get more than two feet of rain when all is done, with Southern Louisiana getting up to a foot of rain,” said Louis Uccellini , director of the National Weather Service.
So much rain is predicted that the National Weather Service had to add a new high-end category to its forecast map, illustrating the potential for more than 20 inches, and over a sizable area:
(National Weather Service)
Dangerous flooding could expand five to six counties inland from the coast.
The European model simulation run Friday afternoon simulated isolated areas of 50-60 inches of rain, which would be an unimaginable disaster.
Mind-boggling and extremely troubling: European model simulates as much as 50-60" of rain from #Harvey : https://t.co/H2pt4VJ0ty pic.twitter.com/8Ut0e77mxB
— Capital Weather Gang (@capitalweather) August 25, 2017
Houston, the nation’s fourth-largest city, could receive 20 inches or more of rain from the storm, depending on exactly where it tracks — with the heaviest moving in Saturday or Sunday and then continuing into early next week. Matt Lanza, a meteorologist based in Houston, said 20 inches would be “devastating” for the city, depending where it fell. A worst-case scenario, Lanza said, would be for this amount of rain to fall just northwest of downtown as “all that water has to push through the bayou networks across the city into Galveston Bay.”
[ Hurricane Harvey’s flood threat sparks memories of Tropical Storm Allison in Southeast Texas ]
GFS model rainfall forecast around Houston through Thursday. (WeatherBell.com)
The Weather Channel’s Knabb pointed out 9 out of 10 people who die in landfalling tropical systems in the U.S. die in water, from either flooding from heavy rain or storm surge.
“Promise yourself that you’re not going to drive your car over a water-covered roadway or drive your car around a barricade when the road is closed,” Knabb said. “Most people who die in inland flooding die in their cars.”
Especially late this weekend and into early next week, areas of western and southern Louisiana could also be hit with double-digit rainfall totals.
Storm surge
The Hurricane Center predicts 6 to 13 feet of water — above normally dry land — inundating coastal areas immediately to the east and north of the landfall location. That amount is based on the assumption that Harvey makes landfall as a Category 3 hurricane. It is critical that affected residents heed evacuation orders.
