Continue reading the main story
“It’s not so much lifting Houston up — it sends you in a different direction for a while,” said Rabbi Amy Weiss, an unapologetically fair-weather fan who got caught up in Astros-mania and who watched Game 7 at her new home because her old one was wrecked by Harvey. “You can climb into the game, into the television, and you’re not thinking about your flooded house.”
Other wounded cities have used professional sports as large-scale therapy.
The New York Yankees reached the World Series just weeks after terrorists flew planes into the twin towers of the World Trade Center on Sept. 11, 2001. (They lost the Series, 4-3, to the Arizona Diamondbacks.)
After Hurricane Katrina in 2005 damaged the home, then known as the Louisiana Superdome, of the New Orleans Saints, the team’s first game back at the stadium in 2006, a 23-3 victory over the Atlanta Falcons, seemed to capture New Orleans’s resilience.
In 2012, the Saints unveiled a bronze statue outside the Superdome memorializing the dramatic blocked punt in that game by the Saints safety Steve Gleason. The statue was called “Rebirth.”
In Houston, a sport that is sometimes referred to as a game of inches captivated a city defined by them. Residents measured the personal devastation from the worst rainfall in United States history in inches — the high-water marks that still stain walls and kitchens and cars and spirits.
Photo
Piles of storm debris still lined the curb on Lake Forest Boulevard, where Mr. Doucett lives. Credit Scott Dalton for The New York Times
So the Astros were cheered on by Rabbi Weiss, who had 31 inches of floodwater in her home. And Mr. Doucett, who had roughly 72 inches. And Bob Heyl, who had 15. And Josh and Katie Halburn, who considered themselves lucky with a mere four. And Bob Dunston, who had 180 in his two-story townhome on the San Jacinto River, his third flood in 16 months.
Advertisement
Continue reading the main story
“We think it’s awesome that they keep getting knocked down and keep getting back up,” Mr. Dunston, 58, said of the Astros, whom he watched on Wednesday at his new rental home. “It’s a good distraction, because at the end of the day, after the Series is over, we’re still going to have to go back in and look at that property and it’s just going to be a screwed-up mess. From the garage floor to five feet into the second floor is 180 inches. Fifteen feet. I walked out the door. I had my computer, a bottle of Crown, a bundle of cigars, two changes of clothes and my father’s flag from his funeral.”
That has been the Houston way lately: to blend talk of the Astros with talk of Harvey, so that conversations go from Jose Altuve to Justin Verlander to drywall to FEMA and back again.
Newsletter Sign Up
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
Sign Up
You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.
Thank you for subscribing.
An error has occurred. Please try again later.
You are already subscribed to this email.
