Robstown house fires raged as Harvey made landfall
Posted:
Updated:
ROBSTOWN -
Like most people, the Rojas family of Robstown, took warnings of Hurricane Harvey, very seriously. They boarded up their homes and left town, in hopes of avoiding any devastation.  
However, an electrical fire erupted at the same time category 4 Harvey hit, and the ferocious flames partnered with the high-speed winds. Before first responders had a chance, a fire that started in one home on the Rojas property had spread to another and another. Before the night's end, three homes had been destroyed, included a massive 3-story Victorian style residence that the Rojas considered their main house.
"The first thing I thought is we would have died in here if we would have stayed. We left, so we're alive and I just wish this wouldn't have happened," said one homeowner, Natali Rojas.
Natali's dad, Jesus Rojas, is the patriarch of the family and even in his darkest hour, he is just thankful no one lost their life.
"I believe that throughout my life I've suffered a lot, we were migrants. We worked all of our lives in fields and trying to show our families how to stay strong, how to believe in God and keep everybody together as a family," Jesus said.
He also is tremendously grateful to the Robstown Fire Department.
"I wanna thank the Fire Department of Robstown for courage to show up in the storm while the tremendous power, the wind the rain were going and they were still out here trying their best it was incredible," Jesus added.
The fire department, like most responders, are all working around the clock to help damage control Harvey's aftermath. It's likely the Rojas will never know the exact cause of the fire; but they do have one thing to rely on, their faith.
Left standing among the rubble, sticking out like it was meant to be there was a statue of the Virgin Mary.
"Some may blame God and some may blame the hurricane but the only thing standing were, holy things, as you can see this statue is the only thing that survived, I dug in there for things and all I found is a Virgin Mary," Natali explained.
The iconic Mother Mary has long time been a symbol of hope for religious and non-religious alike, her presence is certainly felt with Natali.
"Appreciate what you have, listen to the warnings, hug your children and thank God for today and yesterday, and pray for a better tomorrow," she said.
If you'd like to donate to the Rojas family, they have set up a GoFundMe account here.
WEATHER
