Save
YEAR UPON YEAR, at each annual hurricane conference, weather forecasters expressed a growing worry – even fear – that the public had grown apathetic about a storm hitting South Texas.
After all, it had been decades since a major hurricane. It is symbolic but sad that in one of the two office towers in Corpus Christi a stockbroker’s philosophy about a hurricane was simple: “It’s not coming here.” That philosophy was shared by many – too many.
This last week, what started as a tropical wave in the Caribbean turned into the nightmare that has kept meteorologists up for many a night: a storm developing into a major hurricane just offshore.
The timeline is graphic:
•Tuesday, Aug. 22 – Harvey crosses the Yucatán.
•Wednesday, Aug. 23 – Harvey becomes a tropical storm.
•Thursday, Aug. 24 – Category 1 hurricane.
•Friday, Aug. 25 – Category 2, then 3, then 4 – only one removed from the highest.
It came ashore between Corpus Christi and Rockport, bringing with it the whole Atlantic Hurricane retinue: high winds, devastating rain and historic flooding
Harvey is the eighth named storm of the season and is blamed for what officials warn is going to be the greatest disaster to hit the state. From emergency management coordinators to journalists, the English vocabulary is inadequate to describe the havoc in Harvey’s wake: rain and flooding measured not in inches, but feet, and a recovery time measured not in months, but years.
At press time, Harvey still is an active system, thankfully gone inland.
On Tuesday, the National Hurricane Center was monitoring a disturbance off the west coast of Africa with a 90 percent chance of developing into a tropical depression by this weekend. If its path remains unchanged, it will enter the Caribbean.
Which is a topical (and tropical) warning that amid the loss of electrical power, running water and – added to modern life’s essentials – the internet is something not yet mentioned: the peak month for Caribbean hurricane activity, September, is just beginning. 
 
