BEEVILLE – Many people across this county are doing what they can to help those displaced by Hurricane Harvey.
Some are collecting food. Some are gathering clothing.
Members of New Life Church delivered a variety of supplies Tuesday  for those in Ingleside, Port Aransas and Rockport.
Church’s Chicken on Thursday offered free meals to everyone.
Among those in line that day was Jennifer Hranicky whose home is in Port Lavaca,
“We left Thursday for San Antonio,” she said.
She, her husband and four kids came to Beeville on Sunday and are now staying with a relative.
“We have no power in Port Lavaca,” she said. “We don’t know how long we will be here.”
Since evacuating, they have only seen a picture of their home.
“We don’t know if we have roof damage or water damage,” she said.
They hope to stay here until power returns.
“We can’t afford to keep traveling,” she said.
They have to wait for power primarily because of her son Parker.
“He had surgery on his skull a year and two months ago,” she said. “He cannot be out in the heat.
“I have been told it is very hot down there with lots of mosquitoes.
“We are just following the air conditioning.”
On Monday, County Judge Stephanie Moreno and Wally Rodriguez, with the Bee County Expo Center, were in Blanconia handing out water and supplies to those hit the hardest by the hurricane here.
There they met a woman who was inside a trailer house, with four kids, living still without power.
“She was saying she wished she could have a hot shower,” Moreno said. “She had not had a hot shower in three or four days.”
Thanks to the help of BeBe Adamez, these same meals also are being sent to Refugio and soon, possibly, Rockport.
Moreno offered her a generator to power her home so she could shower and have a bit of electricity, albeit temporary.
“Is everybody in our neighborhood going to get a generator?” she asked of the judge.
“No. We only have a couple,” the judge told her.
“Then no,” she told the judge. “Somebody else can use it more than I.”
This mentality seems prevalent throughout the community.
“We have so many selfless people in our area,” Moreno said.
She said she knew the county was hit but wasn’t aware the extent of the damage until they arrived that day.
“Blanconia is the area in our county that really got busted,” she said. “They have a volunteer fire department that got trashed.
“We didn’t know how hard they were hit because no one called to say they needed anything.”
That independent, self-sufficient spirit prevails throughout the county, she said.
“We are here to help,” she added. “We want to provide resources to the community.”
County officials are not the only ones offering their help either.
“One of the guys who organizes cook-offs here took a barbecue pit and made hot meals for people who had not had hot meals in four or five days.”
4-Hers, she said, collected water for those in the hurricane ravaged area. Members of the volleyball team here likewise collected supplies.
“Our community is so generous, almost to a fault,” she said.
That generosity extends to numerous individuals and organizations.
“Congressman Filemon Vela’s office brought in a truck of water to help out,” Moreno said. “We didn’t want to ask for Red Cross or FEMA aid because we wanted those to go to our neighbors.
“The food, the water, all of these donations, have been from private individuals.”
Jason Collins is the editor at the Bee-Picayune and can be reached at 343-5221, or at editor@mySouTex.com .
