• For breaking news, follow @nytimes on Twitter. National correspondents tracking the storm include @mannyNYT in Corpus Christi, @alanblinder and @ckrausss in Houston, @viaSimonRomero in Albuquerque, N.M., and @jswatz in New York.
Leave or stay? Officials offered conflicting opinions.
Hours before Hurricane Harvey was expected to make landfall, the governor and the mayor of Houston seemed at odds about whether to evacuate the nation’s fourth-largest city.
Gov. Greg Abbott had warned at a news conference that the storm was shaping up to be “more dangerous” than previous hurricanes because of the potential for widespread flooding that could leave Texas in the storm’s grip for at least “a week if not longer.”
Houston officials had recommended that most residents wait out the storm in the flood-prone city. But on Friday, Mr. Abbott abruptly urged a different approach.
“I would urge people to strongly consider the evacuation process,” Mr. Abbott said during a news conference. “There is a possibility, the probability, that a lot of people will go for a long time without the basic necessities.”
Mayor Sylvester Turner, in a series of tweets after Mr. Abbott’s remarks, tried to rebut the governor and calm his city.
Advertisement
Continue reading the main story
“Please think twice before trying to leave Houston en masse,” Mr. Turner posted on Friday afternoon. “No evacuation orders have been issued for the city.”
Seven coastal counties from Corpus Christi to the western end of Galveston ordered mandatory evacuations of at least some areas. Mayor Joe McComb of Corpus Christi encouraged residents to leave voluntarily.
Photo
Hurricane Harvey as seen from the International Space Station on Friday. Credit NASA European Pressphoto Agency
Houston, with a population of about 2.3 million people, has a history of floodwaters that led to fatalities. In 2001, Tropical Storm Allison pummeled southeast Texas and was blamed for 22 deaths in the Houston area.
Hurricane Rita, in 2005, never struck Houston directly, but the evacuation, spurred by the recent horror of Katrina in New Orleans, caused disastrous traffic jams ; more than 100 people died while trying to get out of town.
Mr. Abbott described the storm as a “very complex and dangerous hurricane” that will hammer Texans not only with high winds but “record-setting flooding in multiple regions of the state.” The storm is also expected to spawn multiple tornadoes.
I have spoken w/ @GovAbbott of Texas and @LouisianaGov Edwards. Closely monitoring #HurricaneHarvey developments & here to assist as needed.
—         Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) Aug. 25, 2017
After a reporter pointed out that he seemed to be disagreeing with local calls on whether to evacuate, Mr. Abbott said, “I think it is important for the local officials who have the authority and responsibility for this to be the ones to make the call.”
But he added, “I can be suggestive of what I would do and that is, if I were living in the Houston region, as I once did, I would decide to head to areas north of there.”
“My point is this, and that is, if you want to take charge of your life, and ensure that you are providing the greatest possibility for yourself and your family, I think it would be a good idea for you to take a few days off, get out of the Houston area, be safe,” Mr. Abbott said. “You can always get back, get home and clean up later.” — ALAN BLINDER in Houston and DAVE MONTGOMERY in Austin
Advertisement
Here’s how hurricanes work.
Video
How Do Hurricanes Happen?
We explain how hurricanes form — and grow — when cold and warm air merge.
By Aaron Byrd, Alexandra Garcia and Henry Fountain on Publish Date November 16, 2013. Photo by Aaron Byrd. Watch in Times Video »
In a video, we explain how hurricanes form — and grow — when cold and warm air merge.
Climate change has added new questions.
John Schwartz, who covers climate and the environment for The New York Times, writes that the relationship between hurricanes and climate change is not simple . Some things are known with growing certainty — rising sea levels makes storm surge worse. Others, not so much.
One unresolved question, Mr. Schwartz writes, is whether climate change is affecting the number and the intensity of the storms. It could be making some stronger, and certainly wetter. In the article, Katharine Hayhoe , a climate scientist at Texas Tech and one of the authors of a sweeping climate science report, notes that scientists are not saying that hurricanes are necessarily caused by climate change, but are being affected by them.
“We care about a changing climate because it exacerbates the natural risks and hazards that we already face,” she said. “People always want to know is it climate change or is it not? The answer is it’s in between.” Read more »
Leave town, coastal counties urge.
Seven coastal counties from Corpus Christi to the western end of Galveston ordered mandatory evacuations of at least some areas. Mayor Joe McComb of Corpus Christi encouraged residents to leave voluntarily.
Mayor McComb strongly encourages evacuation, especially the low lying areas of Area A and B as seen in the map below (pink and yellow area). pic.twitter.com/Z5gspafgSn
—         CityOfCorpusChristi (@cityofcc) Aug. 24, 2017
The new head of FEMA faces his first big test.
With the storm, the Trump administration faces its first test in dealing with a major natural disaster . The storm will also be the first major challenge for the Federal Emergency Management Agency under Brock Long, who was confirmed as director in June by the Senate.
Mr. Long was the director of Alabama’s disaster relief agency when Hurricane Katrina hit the state in 2005, and his selection has inspired confidence among lawmakers and state disaster relief officials.
Newsletter Sign Up
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
Sign Up
You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.
Thank you for subscribing.
An error has occurred. Please try again later.
You are already subscribed to this email.
