Mom delivers baby at home during Hurricane Harvey
Posted:
Kataleya Rose was born at home during Hurricane Harvey.  (KRIS 6 News)
CORPUS CHRISTI -
As the worst of Hurricane Harvey battered Corpus Christi, Isabel Pena felt another pain -  labor pain. 
At 38 weeks pregnant, she knew what that meant. 
"I just kept trying to tell him: 'She was coming. She was coming,’” Pena said.
Her family called for help.
“We got on the phone and we called EMS but we didn't ever think they were going to show up as bad as it was. The wind was blow bad and there was debris everywhere,"said Pena’s boyfriend Andrew Garza.
If that wasn't bad enough, Pena's house had no power. Her family had been in the dark for hours. The only light they had was from a cell phone.
 "I had walked away with the light to the front door to see if EMS was coming and then I hear her scream: ‘We need the light,’ so I came back and as soon as I got back to the room I seen her head and then right then it was over,” Garza said.
     Kataleya Rose arrived at about 3 a.m. Saturday, but she wasn't breathing. Luckily, that's when an emergency crew arrived. 
“She was out and not even two seconds later, they were already knocking at the door,” Pena said.
     From there, a paramedic took over and the baby began to cream and cry.
"That's when I knew she was going to be OK," Garza said.
    It wasn't over yet. They still needed to get to the hospital.  The trip took longer than usual because of the dangerous weather.
"The ambulance was still dodging debris, trees down,” Garza said.
The ambulance finally made it to Christus Spohn South hospital.
"The baby was immediately was evaluated by a pediatrician here at the hospital and found to be fine and the mother, of course, was evaluated as well and she was completely stable,” said Dr. Kathleen Rasmussen, who works in the hospital's labor and delivery department.
Pena and Garza are grateful to paramedics and hospital staff to have a healthy 6 pound, 9 ounce baby girl.
 “She wanted to make her entrance, so she's here," Pena said.   
Kataleya Rose wasn't the only baby born during the hurricane. 
Doctors and nurses at Christus Spohn South delivered a baby boy and a baby girl during Hurricane Harvey.
At Corpus Christi Medical Center, mother Irma Rodriguez delivered a boy and named him Harvey.
Reading on your phone? Download the KRIS 6 News Mobile App for iOS/iPhone  here  and for Android  here .
WEATHER
