Opinion The Conversation
Hurricane Harvey, Irma, Jose and now Maria. Americans brace for new danger
A string of eastern Caribbean islands faces their second major storm of the month, as the Category 3 Hurricane Maria barrels toward them with 120 mile-per-hour winds, heavy rains and dangerous storm surges.
A string of eastern Caribbean islands faces their second major storm of the month, as the Category 3 Hurricane Maria barrels toward them with 120 mile-per-hour winds, heavy rains and dangerous storm surges.
National Hurricane Center
Despite historic damage, hurricane season isn’t close to over yet.
First Hurricane Harvey flooded huge swaths of the South and now Irma has left hundreds of thousands of Floridians without power more than a week after it struck the state.
Now, even as the impact of Hurricane Jose, which remains well offshore, is being felt in parts of coastal North Carolina, Maria has become the latest powerful storm to be known to many, many Americans.
Maria is poised to strike the Caribbean Islands and the U.S. as this merciless hurricane season continues. On Monday, it had intensified to a Category-5 hurricane with sustained winds of 160 mph and was expected to hit Puerto Rico directly by Wednesday even as the island struggles with the devastating effects of Irma.
Hurricane Jose, meanwhile, is only expected to graze the East Coast with tropical storm winds and heavy rains by Wednesday, the
Here is a glimpse of what to expect in the coming days.
Hurricane Maria
The next few days pose a worrisome scenario for Puerto Rico and the Caribbean Islands. The hurricane center forecasts dangerous storm surge — as much as 9 feet above normal in the Leeward Islands, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
Hurricane Irma, one of the most powerful storms in the Atlantic ever recorded, struck the northern part of Puerto Rico on Sept. 6, but weather experts are warning residents to brace for a worse impact with Maria. Meteorologist Eric Holthaus stressed its danger with this ominous tweet.
https://twitter.com/EricHolthaus/status/909801168288743425
Earlier this month , Irma destroyed hundreds of homes in Puerto Rico, knocked out power to 70 percent of the island’s households and left a third of them without water. And that was after it skirted the island, leaving it better off than many popular Caribbean spots.
Should Maria turn into a Category-5 hurricane by the time it reaches Puerto Rico, it could become the second hurricane of such intensity to ever make landfall, according to Holthaus. Once it strikes Puerto Rico, Hurricane Maria is forecasted to move north well off into the Atlantic Ocean away from Florida.
As of Monday, Hurricane Maria was not yet forecasted to make landfall in mainland U.S.
https://twitter.com/NWS/status/909844971204808704
Hurricane Jose
Forecasters warned of a tropical storm watch in coastal parts of North Carolina, Massachusetts and New England, but Hurricane Jose did not appear to bare the same threat as Irma or even Maria. Jose was forecasted to stay offshore through out its path.
Worst case scenario: Hurricane Jose was reported to be causing some flooding in parts of North Carolina and some heavy rains in New York.
https://twitter.com/WeatherNation/status/909854579486949376
https://twitter.com/NYCMayor/status/909835051713662976
And those are just forecasts of what is expected on the ground.
The damage Hurricanes Harvey and Irma wrought on Texas, Louisiana and Florida within the past several weeks is believed to be in the hundreds of billions of dollars. The cost of Harvey’s destruction, mostly in southeast parts of Texas, has been pegged as high as $190 billion , with Irma’s estimated as high as $100 billion .
Hurricane Irma’s death toll stands as high as 69 people, according to the latest figures reported by CBS News, and several parts of Florida were still reported without power, more than a week after the storm hit. The death toll from Harvey, which made landfall in Texas on Aug. 30, stands as high as 82, The Washington Post reported .
Hurricane Maria is also straining relief efforts from the federal government and posing logistical issues for charities already helping recovery in Texas, Louisiana, and Florida.
https://twitter.com/billmckibben/status/909402464469823488
Have some thoughts to share?
Join me in a conversation: Shoot me a private email with your thoughts or ideas on a different approach to this story. As always, you can also  send us a tweet . 
