A post-Harvey school district update
WAVE STAFF REPORT
Save
From the Calhoun County Independent School District:
Calhoun County Independent School District teachers and staff reported back to duty Wednesday, post-Hurricane Harvey, and students are scheduled to return on Monday, Sept. 11. The start time for all CCISD schools will be delayed by one hour on Sept. 11 only, so that the bus drivers have better visibility when they are in route early on the first day of school. Schools will start at their normal, published time the remainder of the school year, unless otherwise specified. CCISD campus schedules for the 2017-18 school year are provided at this link (so families can calculate their Sept. 11 delayed start time): http://www.calcoisd.org/common/pages/DisplayFile.aspx?itemId=10471741
In regards to damage to Calhoun County ISD facilities caused by the hurricane, we wanted to take a moment to clear up some misconceptions and incorrect information that is appearing on social media. The storm caused minor damage to most campuses, but there was no damage that is so severe that it cannot be repaired and/or safely utilized for the school year. All campuses are currently operating with power, air, telephone, water and sewer. Staff is working hard to prepare for students to arrive Monday.
Also, we are aware that a San Marcos-based newspaper reported, inaccurately, that “most of [our] students, teachers and staff have literally lost everything” … and that report does not reflect the status of the majority of our community, as we currently understand it, nor did we provide them with that summary. The report, albeit inflated, was a part of a larger story discussing the donations that San Marcos ISD is collecting to provide resources to Calhoun County ISD. Those efforts by San Marcos ISD and the many other groups across the state are valued and appreciated.
Moving forward, we do know that some families lost more than others and we will be surveying campus administrators and counselors as our students return back to school on Monday to get a more accurate and specific list of needs that we can respond to. Calls from schools and groups around the state have come in with the potential for donations to help families in need. As donations come in, the district will sort and distribute, according to need.
Additionally, the Education Foundation of Calhoun County has set up a method for accepting monetary donations online: http://www.calcoisd.org/cms/One.aspx?portalId=499393&amp;pageId=10615667
On behalf of Calhoun County ISD, we thank our community for their continued support and will do our best to provide timely and accurate information as available. Information is shared at www.calcoisd.org and on Calhoun County ISD’s Facebook and Twitter pages.
