Tropical Storm Harvey Impact to the Port of Corpus Christi - Hurricane Readiness Condition 3
Wednesday
Aug 23, 2017 at 5:49 PM Aug 23, 2017 at 5:53 PM
Submitted
 CORPUS CHRISTI – The Port of Corpus Christi continues to monitor possible impact scenarios for Tropical Storm/Hurricane Harvey in and around the Texas Coastal Bend region.
Hurricane Watch is now in effect from Baffin Bay to San Luis Pass, and Storm Surge Watch now in effect from Baffin Bay to High Island. Tropical Storm Force Winds and surge impacts are expected to begin Friday with landfall along the mid Coast Friday Night.
Heavy rainfall and flooding will be the primary concern as the system is expected to stall across the area through the weekend. As a precautionary measure for the anticipated landfall of the tropical storm Harvey, the Port has increased its hurricane readiness status to Port Condition 3 (Tropical Hazards expected within 48 hours), in accordance with its 2017 Hurricane Readiness Plan (HRP).
As part of Port Condition 3, Port police and security personnel are assisting the Harbormaster with vessels seeking safe harbor and they are monitoring vessels that have been approved to moor at Port facilities. Maintenance crews continue securing Port facilities and buildings to include all Oil Docks, Cargo Docks, Guard Shacks, Admin/Annex buildings, Ortiz Center and Security Command Center. Each of the departments is on track of their own preparations in accordance of Port Condition 3 of the HRP.
The port continues to be fully engaged in general readiness activities in coordination with surrounding the communities, industry partners and state and federal agencies. All port users shall immediately adhere to the requirements and recommendations set forth in the most current United States Coast Guard (USCG) Marine Safety Information Bulletin issued 08-22-17.
During the preparedness operations of any level of Hurricane Preparedness Conditions, the safety of all port personnel and stakeholders is paramount for the Port of Corpus Christi Authority.
“The geographical location of Port Corpus Christi and its facilities along the Texas Coast makes having a hurricane readiness plan imperative for safety, commerce, and resiliency. The Port is taking this storm very seriously and it is in full-preparedness mode anticipating Harvey’s landfall, and will continue monitoring its strength and path as it get closer to the Texas Gulf Coast.” said John LaRue, Executive Director
About Us
