Save
County Judge Bobby Blaschke on Tuesday morning said getting electricity back for the county will probably take two weeks or more.
Blaschke said he rode out the storm in Woodsboro ISD’s dome, where backup electricity and water were available.
“I slept about five hours or so,” Blaschke said.
He added that he had an AEP briefing a couple of days ago.
He outlined three points: Transmission lines have been severely cut from Victoria to Refugio, substations are being fixed and the alternative electrical feed from Taft will be used once things are ready.
A cell tower was erected at the Refugio County Community Center in Refugio for communication in the county. Up until Tuesday, cell service was out.
“AT&T responded pretty quickly,” he said.
“Electricity may take a couple of weeks, maybe longer,” Blaschke said.
He said thousands of trucks and contractors are on the way, according to Blaschke.
The cities of Refugio, Woodsboro and Bayside are struggling to get water back as well, he said.
Meanwhile, he said Texas Parks & Wildlife used Refugio as a hub to send game wardens to the Houston area.
“They are calling it a 500-year flood,” Blaschke said.
Also, the San Antonio Fire Department has sent numerous first responders to Refugio.
“There have been no injuries through it all,” he said.
Refugio school district Superintendent Melissa Gonzales said she was working with insurance people and adjusters.
She met with the school’s contractors on the $20 million bond issue construction of the high school and elementary school.
“Until we have power, I don’t know when we will open,” she said.
She noted that the elementary school has minimal damage.
“We’ll get that going as soon as possible,” she said.
Woodsboro school district, too, is out until power is restored.
“Lots of hard work is going on. And it is going to get stressful,” Blaschke said.
He noted that the hurricane was a wake-up call for a lot of people.
“Complacency is our greatest enemy,” he said.
He said 150 mph wind gusts were what residents said they experienced. That high wind took a toll on many structures and trees.
His advice: “This is Day Four (since the hurricane). Be calm and patient.”
