Calhoun County weathers Hurricane Harvey
By MELONY OVERTON
Email
Hurricane Harvey damaged part of Fay Bauer Sterling Park on Main Street in Port Lavaca. Port Lavaca is still without power, water and sewage. (Photo by Tania French)
The remains of what Hurricane Harvey left of the Lighthouse Beach Pier in Port Lavaca. (Photo by Tania French)
Several trees and power lines are down and in the streets of Port Lavaca due to Hurricane Harvey. (Photo by Tania French)
Save
As of Sunday afternoon, Calhoun County residents were allowed to return to the county, but Calhoun County Emergency Management and City of Port Lavaca officials warned that those who returned would be without water, sewer or power.
Mary Orta, an assistant to emergency management coordinator Ladonna Thigpen, said U.S. Highway 87 was expected to open Sunday evening and traffic could possibly be averted to FM 1090 into Port Lavaca.
“The evacuation order is still in effect, but the roads seem to be passable at this time. We are not turning anyone away, but we want to make them aware that there is no water, no sewer and no electricity. No stores are open. We are expected to have heavy rain and possible flooding, but we are not turning anyone away at this time,” Orta said Sunday afternoon.
Orta said emergency management did not know what percent of the population stayed to weather the storm despite a Commissioners Court order for mandatory evacuation Thursday morning before Hurricane Harvey made landfall near Rockport around 10 p.m. on Friday.
Robert Bradshaw, Port Lavaca City Manager, said the City and County were working together to assess damages and restore services.
Water service was temporarily restored Saturday afternoon, but leaks were discovered Sunday morning, Bradshaw said.
“We had to close it down because of leakages. We are still going through sectors of the city trying to discover where the leaks are to get everyone online again,” Bradshaw said.
Sunday morning, emergency management received an update from Guadalupe Blanco River Authority about a major break in the water lines. This affected all customers who are serviced by GBRA.
Bradshaw said the city is still without power.
“The AEP assessment team is in town with crews that are starting to do preliminary repairs,”
Bradshaw said.
As of 9 a.m. on Saturday, approximately 200,000 customers were without power in Corpus Christi and surrounding areas. Wind conditions must be below 30 mph before bucket trucks can be used to remove hazards such as downed power lines or the first step in the restoration process.
“Right now, we are trying to determine if we can safely let crews begin the first step,” said Tom Coad AEP Vice President of Distribution Region Operations. “At the same time in areas where it is safe to do so, we will instruct our damage assessors to begin activities to determine the extent of the damage inflicted by Hurricane Harvey.”
Coad noted that initial reports indicate that significant damage did occur, particularly with the transmission lines and facilities.
“There are preliminary reports of 54 substations out of service and at least 56 transmission lines out of service,” Coad said.
As of 9 a.m., 14,000 customers were without power in Port Lavaca.
Bradshaw said Allied Waste has been contacted for debris removal.
“We are still under a mandatory evacuation and none of that will start until that order is lifted,” he said.
“Formosa is going back online today or tomorrow, and we will try to accommodate folks who can come back as best we can,” he said. “We will support wherever we can.”
Bradshaw said City Hall was closed until further notice.
“That is contingent upon all services coming back online. People need to be patient. Phone service at City Hall is spotty and the department heads have spotty service. We are at the mercy of the system right now,” he said.
Bradshaw dispelled rumors that the Port Lavaca Police Department was preventing convenience store owners from opening.
”A rumor was that PLPD was telling them not to open their stores, but that is not true. We are supporting all efforts to get the community back on track and running,” he said.
Bradshaw reported flooding within the city, but that it was receding.
“ We lost both the piers at Lighthouse Beach Park and at Bayfront Peninsula Park. They are completely gone. The drainage within the city worked as best as it could,” he said.
“Overall, we had trees down and fences down. We had light structural damage and some flooding from the tidal surge around the bayfront area. We came out pretty good. A lot of our residents did evacuate and that makes it easier on us,” he said.
Bradshaw said highways 87 and 35 are open.
"The Flip Flop Festival scheduled for this coming weekend, we will probably have to cancel that because may not be in the position to have all the amenities it would require," Bradshaw said.
“We are advising people not to come back right now. With no power and water, it does not make sense to come back,” he said.
City curfew starts at noon and last until midnight, Bradshaw said.
“We will be flexible with it. Common sense will dictate how we implement it. We will adjust it accordingly with Formosa possibly coming back. We are trying to protect citizens and their property,” he said. “If they want to come back that is up to them.”
Bradshaw reported no fatalities and two instances of looting.
Bradshaw said essential city and county personnel decided to stay and weather the storm.
“The police and fire departments, five public works employees and the public works director and myself are here,” he said. “It is part of my job description to stay. “I love my community. As far as the first responders the first few days are critical.”
