Buyer Beware: Cars Flooded by Hurricane Harvey Are Now Flooding the Market
By Pam Wright
November 16 2017 12:00 AM EDT
weather.com
Cars sitting in the rear of a used car lot were left pushed together following Hurricane Ike September 16, 2008, in Galveston, Texas. Today, cars from Hurricane Harvey are being sold in the marketplace.
(Scott Olson/Getty Images)
At a Glance
Hundreds of thousands of vehicles were flooded in Southeast Texas during Hurricane Harvey.
Many are now found on used car lots and are a risky proposition for potential buyers.
When Hurricane Harvey hovered over Southeast Texas for days on end dumping gallons upon gallons of water on the streets of Houston and elsewhere, hundreds of thousands of cars became emerged. Now, those same cars are reportedly being sold in the Houston area, as well as in more distant locations like San Antonio.
It's perfectly legal to sell cars that were once underwater, but naive purchasers may be unaware the extent of the damage incurred to a vehicle that has spent any amount of time in water.
"Bottom line, flood cars literally rot from the inside out ," Chris Basso, Carfax Public Relations Manager, told KGBT, noting that water impacts mechanical systems, electrical system and even safety systems like airbags and anti-lock breaks. 
Flooded vehicles may even prove to be a health risk because mold and bacteria can build up in the "soft parts of the car, especially the ventilation systems," Basso noted. 
In a September press release, Dick Raines, president of Carfax, said consumers need to be on high alert and not just in Texas or Florida, where similar flooding triggered by Hurricane Irma flooded thousands of vehicles.
“Our data shows there’s still much work to be done in helping consumers avoid buying flood-damaged cars,” Raines said. "They can, and do, show up all over the country, whether it be a few miles or hundreds of miles from where the flooding occurred. With two devastating storms already this year, it’s vital for used car buyers everywhere to protect themselves from flooded cars that may wind up for sale. Start with a thorough test drive, a vehicle history report and a mechanic’s inspection before buying any used car."
Carfax data collected from individual state department of motor vehicles and insurance companies indicates that drivers may be behind the wheel of more than 325,000 previously flooded vehicles in the United States, 51,000 of them in Texas. 
According to CarTalk, any car where floodwater that rose above its floor is considered "totaled ."
Some indicators that the car you're considering has been flooded include mineral deposits or discoloration on the seats, seatbelts or door panels. You may even find some debris in the trunk of the vehicle or the tell-tale odor of Lysol or some other disinfectant.
"Be alert for damp and musty odors," Mariam Ali, a spokesperson for the American Automobile Association, told weather.com in a September phone interview. "There will be dirt build-up in unusual places like underneath the dashboard."
One way to protect yourself is to either have an inspector evaluate the vehicle or you can use free services like CarFax ,  Experian’s Auto Check  or the  National Insurance Crime Bureau's VinCheck  to check the history of the vehicle before making any purchases by typing in the VIN number. 
The Weather Company’s primary journalistic mission is to report on breaking weather news, the environment and the importance of science to our lives. This story does not necessarily represent the position of our parent company, IBM.
Most Popular
