Save
REFUGIO - About 40 officials, ranging from law enforcement first responders, elected city officials and school district personnel gathered late Wednesday to discuss a possible hurricane making landfall in the area.
The National Weather Service weather models show Tropical Storm Harvey becoming a hurricane and striking the coast near Corpus Christi.
Refugio County Judge Bobby Blaschke and others decided to close the courthouse business on Friday, so employees could make arrangements to handle their personal affairs.
"We didn't want employees working in those conditions," he said.
He noted that regular hours would return Monday.
Blaschke said it was too late to order an evacuation because of planning and organizing such an order.
However, he urged all to "be aware" of the dangers of  Tropical Storm Harvey and expected Hurricane Harvey upon landfall.
For residents with land lines, a code red was sent Tuesday evening warning residents of the dangers of flooding. The system reverses 911 calling.
"Low lying areas be warned," Blaschke said.
He said Sheriff Pinky Gonzales sent warnings to those residents in the Mission River Oaks and along the Guadalupe River near Woodsboro.
Also, warnings to those with motor homes and travel trailers were urged to move to higher ground.
Above all, Blaschke advised folks to "stay calm."
Meanwhile, the National Weather Service reported Tropical Storm Harvey at up to 45 mph wind gusts had picked up speed at 10 mph.
The most likely time of arrival on the Texas Coast is estimated at mid day Friday.
Potential storm surge was estimated at 5 to 7 feet.
Harvey's winds could be up to 85 mph with a Category 1 designation, which is likely.
Rainfall, which is considered the most dangerous elements of the storms, now is estimated between 15 to 20 inches.
A hurricane warning is now in effect from Port Mansfield to Matagorda. Also, a surge storm warning is in effect from Port Mansfield to San Luis Pass.
Also, a flash flood watch is in effect for most of South Texas.
More updates will be provided during the day today as the storm treks toward the coast.
