Facebook Twitter Google+ LinkedIn Pinterest
How the city at the ground zero of Hurricane Harvey is moving forward 7 weeks later
FEMA has struggled to keep up with the litany of disasters that includes Hurricanes Irma and Maria as well as California wildfires.
Post to Facebook
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
15
Join the Nation's Conversation
To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs
How the city at the ground zero of Hurricane Harvey is moving forward 7 weeks later
Rick Jervis , USA TODAY Published 1:29 p.m. ET Oct. 17, 2017 | Updated 7:11 p.m. ET Oct. 18, 2017
CLOSE
Hurricane Harvey decimated communities along the Coastal Bend and left large swaths of the Lone Star State underwater when it roared ashore in late August. Now those communities are trying to pick up the pieces. Wochit
Deborah James rummages through her Sea Shell Shoppe in Rockport, Texas, which was pummeled by Hurricane Harvey in August. James is salvaging items in the store and hopes to reopen sometime next year.
(Photo: Rick Jervis)
CONNECT TWEET 7 LINKEDIN 15 COMMENTEMAILMORE
ROCKPORT, Texas — Each day, Deborah James methodically removes rows of seashells and merchandise from her storm-ravaged Sea Shell Shoppe, wipes everything down with a vinegar-peroxide mixture and stores them in plastic bins in a nearby shipping container.
It's been seven weeks since Hurricane Harvey roared through this seaside town, crushing buildings, splintering roofs and displacing thousands of people. The long road to normalcy sometimes seems far off. But for James, 65, it's done one shell at a time. 
"This really hurts," she says as she rummages through her mold-infested store, which lost part of the roof during the storm. "But I don't want to leave. I don't want to give up this corner."
Ground zero for Hurricane Harvey, Rockport and neighboring Fulton received some of the worst wind and storm surge damage from the Category 4 storm that made landfall here Aug. 25. But media attention quickly shifted away to the Harvey-induced floods in Houston and later, hurricanes in Florida and Puerto Rico and the California wildfires. 
"That attention was never here," James says. "It went straight to Houston."
The Federal Emergency Management Agency has struggled to keep up with the litany of disasters. FEMA officials pulled workers from other federal agencies, such as Homeland Security and the Army Corps of Engineers, to staff the recovery effort in Aransas County, which includes Rockport, says Rita Egan, a FEMA spokeswoman. 
So far, nearly 13,000 people have registered for FEMA assistance in Aransas County and the agency has approved $22.4 million in aid, she says. 
"We are stretched thin, there's no question about that," Egan says. 
Residents look through donations at the Aransas County Harvey Donation Center in Rockport TX, Oct. 17 2017.
 (Photo: Courtney Sacco, Caller-Times for the USA TODAY NETWORK)
 
Harvey affected about one-fourth of the county's 9,228 structures, causing around $420 million in property losses, according to county statistics. Around 6,000 of the county's 24,000 residents lost their homes, says Rick McLester, Fulton Police Chief and Emergency Management Coordinator for the county. 
McLester says he was somewhat dismayed when, at the height of recovery, he was alerted by FEMA that the agency was diverting assets from Rockport to Florida in preparation for Hurricane Irma's landfall there. McLester says he noticed the number of FEMA workers shrink from the 20s and 30s to the 10s today. 
Residents and officials feared being eclipsed by other disasters. "There is a sense of that," he says.
