DPS Urges Texans to Prepare for Hurricane Harvey
Posted:
Updated:
The Texas Rangers were reportedly investigating after Orange Grove Chief of Police Roy Guerrero was placed on administrative leave with pay.
The Texas Department of Public Safety (DPS) is urging Texans along the Gulf Coast region to prepare for severe weather, strong winds and localized flooding through the weekend.  
Hurricane Harvey has the potential to produce large amounts of rainfall over the next several days. Flooding and high winds could cause scattered power outages, fallen trees and property damage.
DPS is closely monitoring the weather conditions.  DPS is working closely with the National Weather Service, our local officials in the storm's path, and our state and federal emergency management partners to prepare for and respond to this storm. We will continue to work together for the duration of this storm and will also coordinate the recovery efforts in the wake of Hurricane Harvey.  DPS is assisting as needed with resources from across the state.
It is critical for Texans and all of those in the path of this storm to:
Follow the instructions and heed warnings by local officials.
Stay informed about changing weather conditions in and around your area.
Communicate with family members on safety plans.
Consider any special needs for individuals with disabilities or the elderly.
Review hurricane evacuation maps, and select a route for you and your family.
Ensure you have your emergency kit ready, including essential documents, supplies and provisions.
If traveling in a vehicle, keep an eye out for flooding and runoff affecting roadways. Turn around, don't drown when approaching flooded roads. Most hurricane and flood-related deaths are in-vehicle drownings.
If possible, avoid driving at night - the roadway conditions may be masked by the darkness.
Do not walk into flooding areas (It can take as little as six inches of water to knock an adult off his or her feet. Furthermore, water may be flowing more rapidly than it appears).
If you are in a low lying area, get to higher ground when flooding begins.
Keep cell phones charged so emergency calls can be made if a landline is unavailable.
Ensure vehicles have a full fuel tank.
Keep a paper map on hand in case known routes are blocked and cell phones do not work.
Citizens should stay tuned to local television and radio stations for weather and traffic updates.
Visit the following links for everything you need to be prepared in case of a storm:
