Hurricane Franklin Brought Heavy Rain To Mexico (RECAP)
By Chris Dolce and Jonathan Erdman
Aug 11 2017 07:30 AM EDT
weather.com
Franklin made landfall as a Category 1 hurricane around midnight Thursday morning.
Flooding rainfall and landslides were the main concerns in Mexico.
Franklin made landfall as a hurricane in eastern Mexico overnight on August 10th and rapidly weakened to a remnant low over the highest terrain Thursday morning.
After becoming the Atlantic Basin's first hurricane of 2017 over the Bay of Campeche, Franklin made landfall around midnight CDT Thursday in the Mexican state of Veracruz as a Category 1 hurricane with maximum estimated winds of 85 mph.
La Vigueta in the state of Veracruz has reported a wind gust of 45 mph, while hurricane hunters reported wind gusts as high as 90 mph a few hundred miles off the coast evening on the 9th. 
Although Franklin's circulation quickly fell apart over Mexico, it brought moisture with it across the continent.
A few selected rainfall reports (from the Servicio Meteorológico Nacional in Mexico and ogimet.com ): 
La Joya, Veracruz: 11.9 inches
Teocelo, Veracruz: 11.4 inches
Zacapoaxtla, Puebla: 11.0 inches (monthly record rainfall)
Jalapa, Veracruz: 9.4 inches
La Soledad, Puebla: 8.9 inches (monthly record rainfall)
Zaragoza, Puebla: 7.8 inches (monthly record rainfall)
A year ago, eastern Mexico was ravaged by flooding and mudslides from Tropical Storm Earl which claimed the lives of 81 people .
After dissipating over Mexico, remnant energy from Franklin may help spawn another tropical depression or tropical storm in the eastern Pacific in the days ahead.
(MORE: Franklin's "Ghost" to Spawn Another Tropical Cyclone? )
Franklin's First Landfall
Franklin made its first landfall as a tropical storm just before 11 p.m. CDT Monday night near Pulticub, Mexico, about 180 miles south-southwest of Cozumel. 
Significant flash flooding occurred in the city of Campeche as Franklin moved through Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula on Tuesday.
The Weather Company’s primary journalistic mission is to report on breaking weather news, the environment and the importance of science to our lives. This story does not necessarily represent the position of our parent company, IBM.
The Weather Company An IBM Business
