Tracking Harvey: Storm slows down, two dead and at least 30 missing
Texas Governor Greg Abbott speaks at a press conference on Hurricane Harvey
KIII 8:33 AM. CDT August 27, 2017
Waves pound the shore from approaching Hurricane Harvey on August 25, 2017 in Corpus Christi, Texas. Hurricane Harvey has intensified into a hurricane and is aiming for the Texas coast with the potential for up to 3 feet of rain and 125 mph winds.
(Photo: Joe Raedle/Getty Images, 2017 Getty Images)
CORPUS CHRISTI (KIII NEWS) - Tropical storm Harvey has continued to weaken, with winds observed at 40mph. The storm is now drifting southwest. It is not expected that Harvey will move far enough over the coast to regenerate. 
As of 1:00 p.m. Saturday, the storm had been downgraded to a tropical storm.
Harvey is expected to continue weakening in the next 48 hours. It is likely to weaken to a tropical depression on
Sunday.
The mayor of Rockport, Texas has reported the state's first fatality during tropical storm Harvey. The man was trapped in his burning house during the height of the hurricane. 
Mayor C. J. Wax said that authorities did not discover the body of the victim until Saturday morning. 
A Houston official also confirmed a death late Saturday due to flooding. 
The storm's toll will take time to determine. Aransas County Sheriff Bill Mills said that 30 to 40 people remained unaccounted for as of Saturday evening, and about 30 people were being treated for injuries. 
Aransas County Sheriff Bill Mills said 30 to 40 people remained unaccounted for as of Saturday evening. About 30 people were being treated for injuries in the county, which includes Rockport.
As Harvey continues to slow down, the biggest concern is now rain. Totals of nearly 20 inches of rain have been reported in the Houston area, and the flooding is expected to continue. Storm surge warnings remain for parts of the Texas coast. The Harris County Sherriff's Department warned people to stay in their homes, tweeting "Non-life threatening water inside home is safer than going oustide. Difficult &scary, but we'll get to you. Pls shelter in place. Be safe." 
LIVE BLOG:  Real time Harvey updates
The hurricane made landfall as a Category 4 between Port Aransas and Port O'Connor around 10 p.m. on Friday night. The storm made a second landfall on the Northeastern Shore Of Copano Bay early Saturday morning as a Category 3 hurricane with 125 MPH winds.
It was the first Category 4 to make landfall in the U.S. since Charley in 2004. There are reports of damage throughout the Coastal Bend area, and it appears Rockport was one of the hardest hit areas. 
Severe damage has been reported, including the collapse of a  single story senior housing complex .
Reports of damage are also coming in from around Corpus Christi, mostly involving downed trees and power lines, and debris.  
As of 1am intermediate advisory, Harvey is now at 125 mph. Located 5 miles north of Rockport.
— NWS Corpus Christi (@NWSCorpus) August 26, 2017
#Harvey made landfall at 10 PM CDT as a category 4 hurricane near Rockport, Texas, with max winds of 130 mph and min pressure of 938 mb. pic.twitter.com/98y5wpKmBw
— NHC Atlantic Ops (@NHC_Atlantic) August 26, 2017
The storm had reached Category 4 status around 6 p.m. Friday, according to the National Hurricane Center.
President Trump approved Governor Greg Abbott's disaster declaration request on Friday night. 
At the request of the Governor of Texas, I have signed the Disaster Proclamation, which unleashes the full force of government help!
— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 26, 2017
In a separate tweet early Saturday night, President Trump applauded the "wonderful coordination" between federal, state and local governments.
 
Wonderful coordination between Federal, State and Local Governments in the Great State of Texas - TEAMWORK! Record setting rainfall.
— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 26, 2017
 
Data from an Air Force Reserve Hurricane Hunter aircraft indicated the max sustained winds increased to near 130 mph with even higher gusts. A national weather station in Port Aransas measured a wind gust of 116 mph around 8:15 p.m. Friday.
NEW: #Harvey continues to intensify and is now a category 4 #hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 130 mph. https://t.co/tW4KeGdBFb pic.twitter.com/7CkJkuafTb
— NHC Atlantic Ops (@NHC_Atlantic) August 25, 2017
Weather station ANPT2 in #PortAransas just measured a wind gust of 116 mph #HurricaneHarvey #txwx
TRACKING HARVEY: Hurricane Center
Sustained tropical storm force winds reached the middle Texas coast by mid-day Friday, according to the National Hurricane Center. 
The eye of Hurricane Harvey is 40 miles away from Moving into the area of land between Rockport and Aransas Pass. pic.twitter.com/kqfZ5ZAroE
— Kiii 3 Weather (@kiii3weather) August 25, 2017
At the entrance to the Texas A&M Corpus Christi campus, winds and rain were already bearing down on the area. 
