The power of Hurricane Harvey
By Tom Boynton (editing by Kathy Boynton)
Sep 10, 2017
Save
Late Friday, Aug. 25, category 4 hurricane Harvey slammed into the Texas coast. It riveted my attention as it headed in our direction. Even as it approached, I was glad that God has absolute control over all things, including hurricanes.
Though tiny when compared to God’s infinite power, hurricanes always revitalize my heart’s wonder and awareness of His mighty works.
When facing a hurricane, one cannot avoid being awed by its incredible power to devastate thousands of square miles simultaneously. Yet, that power is dwarfed by the incredible power of God’s absolute authority. God, who controls every air and water molecule in each hurricane, also created and maintains hundreds of billions of galaxies. Each galaxy, in turn, contains hundreds of billions of stars and planets. The psalmist, David, passionately praised God while thinking about the intricate manner in which God had created him.
“I will praise thee; for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: marvellous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well,” (Psalm 139:14).
Though God created each of us, we all enter life as sinful creatures because of the fall.
“Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned,” (Romans 5:12).
Sin causes people to dislike God’s authority. Thus, the word “sin” is very unpopular. It implies that we have violated the authority of our creator. Our only hope is to repent and ask His forgiveness.
Forgiveness is possible only because God the Son came as the Messiah promised to Adam and Eve. Christ’s sacrificial death was prophesied and pictured for thousands of years by the animal sacrifices of God’s people.
When Christ’s birth was near, the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph. He spoke of Jesus to whom Mary, a virgin, would give birth. “And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins.” (Matthew 1:21)
All who die without forgiveness will face eternal torment at the hands of God who controls hurricanes. He offers the following invitation, “Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is none else,” (Isaiah 45:22)
Has He softened your heart to repent and follow Him?
