MUST WATCH
What Hurricane Harvey looks like from space 00:41
Those who stay should "elevate and get into a structure that can withstand potentially Category 3 winds from a hurricane," said Long, the FEMA director.
The natural disaster test: Trump braces for Hurricane Harvey
"The bottom line message is, right now, if people have not heeded the warning, again, their window to do so is closing," Long said. "If they refuse to heed the warning, that's on them."
Long said he is "very worried" about storm surge, or "wind-driven water," slamming coastal areas, saying it has the "highest potential to kill the most amount of people and cause the most amount of damage."
Trump tweeted that he has spoken with the governors of Texas and Louisiana, saying he is "closely monitoring Hurricane Harvey developments and here to assist as needed."
Record flooding expected
Christopher Beafneaux, left, Ernesto Villarreal, center, and Roman Lopez board up windows of a business in Galveston.
Officials worried that Harvey's deluge of rain will drench Texas and the region for several days.
"We could see this storm park for almost five days in some places, and we hear three feet of rain," said Bill Read, the former director of the National Hurricane Center. "That's just going to be a huge problem for these areas."
"The water is going to be the issue," Corpus Christi Mayor Joe McComb said. "We've never had anything like this."
Harvey is also causing concern in New Orleans, where heavy rain could usher in as much as 20 inches of rain through early next week and overwhelm the city's already-compromised drainage system .
Storm nears shore
Joey Walker, 25, works with the Galveston Island Beach Patrol and is riding out the storm from a house on Galveston Island. He posted video of near-white out conditions overlooking Stewart Beach.
A post shared by Joey Walker (@joeywalker.9) on
Aug 25, 2017 at 11:58am PDT
Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner said anyone not leaving should plan to stay off the roads once the storm starts.
"People need to know, this is not a one-, two-day event and done," Turner said.
'I'm trying to be strong'
The threat of Harvey became evident Thursday when several coastal Texas counties issued evacuation orders, leading to hordes of residents sitting bumper to bumper for miles.
Traffic on Interstate 37 between San Antonio and Corpus Christi was backed up for miles Thursday.
Rose Yepez told CNN it took her twice as long as usual to drive 140 miles from Corpus Christi to San Antonio, en route to Texas Hill Country.
Private vehicles -- along with city buses packed with adults and children carrying backpacks -- jammed roads for hours.
"I'm shaking inside, but for them, I'm trying to be strong," a Corpus Christi woman who was waiting with her two daughters to board a bus out of town told CNN affiliate KRIS.
Workers at 39 offshore petroleum production platforms and an oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico also evacuated Thursday, the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement said.
A sign reading "Be Nice Harvey" was left behind on a boarded-up business  in Port Aransas.
First responders such as Brittany Fowler stayed behind and waited for the storm.
"Hopefully, it doesn't do any damage, but if it does, we've prepared," Fowler, a firefighter in Corpus Christi, wrote on Instagram.
Fowler's family helped by boarding up windows and doors at her home, and she bought plenty of water, food and a small power generator.
A post shared by Brittany Fowler (@bafowler1) on
Aug 24, 2017 at 1:56pm PDT
Despite the warnings, Elsie and David Reichenbacher prepped supplies and planned to stay put in Corpus Christi.
"I've gone through a lot of hurricanes. I've lived here most of my life," Elsie Reichenbacher said. "I'd rather take care of my home and my animals and be safe here. I'm on high ground with my house."
CNN's Joe Sterling, Amanda Jackson, Matt Rehbein, AnneClaire Stapleton, Dakin Andone, David Williams, David Shortell, Eliott C. McLaughlin, Nick Valencia and Keith Allen contributed to this report.
