Save
Staying one step ahead of Hurricane Harvey, representatives for the Insurance Council of Texas scrambled to make the last few stops on the 12th Annual Hurricane Tour of the Texas Coast Wednesday with a stop at the Port Lavaca Wave.
“We got a call Monday afternoon from meteorologists that they had to man the battle stations, that they can’t leave. We lost a guy from Houston, Corpus Christi and down in the Valley because they couldn’t break away (for the tour),” said Mark Hanna, ICT spokesperson. “But we just have to carry on.”
Hanna was speaking of John Metz, with the National Weather Service Corpus Christi office, who was supposed to accompany him and Manuel Villarreal, who serves as the Texas Windstorm Insurance Association ombudsman for the Texas Department of Insurance, on this tour.
“We have 15 different cities closer to 45 stops hitting every newspaper, radio station, TV station along the coast from Beaumont and Port Arthur to Port Isabel,” Hanna said. “It is something we do for hurricane prep whether there is a hurricane out there or not.”
Hanna said his message changes yearly because of the complacency amongst coastal residents when it comes to hurricanes and coverage.
“There are places like Corpus Christi that have not had a hurricane in 46 years. They have no clue of what it is to go through a hurricane. The people we have talked to who have gone through hurricanes and stayed and not evacuated said never again,” he said.
Hanna said the ICT’s fear is people will downgrade a storm thinking they can ride it out.
“Hurricane Ike was a Category 2, and the people who rode it out said never again,” he said. “These are very deadly storms and often the National Weather Service will say don’t stick around, and heed any type of evacuation.”
Hanna said Port Lavaca, on the other hand, has experienced recent hurricanes.
“You’ve been through it all. The city has been here for over 100 years. It’s seen its share of very bad storms. You’re still here, but just use common sense and life and limb is your number one priority, and that is why we say be prepared to evacuate and have an evacuation plan,” he said.
“If you are planning to ride it out, it’s not going to be easy, but you may have done it before and you know what type of emergency items you will need. You may be alone. You may not have any power or water. There will not be restaurants and convenience stores open, there may not be emergency officials to come help you. If you have any type of emergency you are on your own,” he said.
As far as coverage, if a named storm is in the Gulf, Hanna said a person cannot buy windstorm insurance through the private market.
“It has to become a hurricane to buy it from TWIA, and TWIA has 60 percent of all of the windstorm policies. The other private market have the other 40 percent,” he said.
Hanna called Tropical Storm Harvey a “rainmaker,” which will cause  flooding.
“It takes 30 days for a flood insurance policy to take effect. If you bought it right now it would not do you any good. You can’t just see a storm out there and buy insurance now,” he said.
Hanna said now with a named storm in the Gulf, it is a good time to check in with your insurance agent.
“They are paid to answer questions you may have. The number one question could be, ‘Do I have all of the coverage I need for this particular storm that is coming this way? I want to make sure I am paid up, and do I have flood insurance? Do I have windstorm?,’” he said.
Hanna also said to ask an agent about “additional living expenses” or ALE.
“If your house is blown away, the insurance company will write you a check and that money will be enough for you to stay somewhere in a hotel or motel, rent an apartment, or if your car or truck is taken away, it will leave you money for transportation and clothing and food,” he said.
“Make sure you are getting all of the discounts you can get, too,” he said.
In addition to windstorm and flood insurance, Hanna recommends having a residential fire policy to protect homeowners from not only fires, but burglary, theft and liability. Hanna said insurance agencies can sell all three.
The tour ended Friday.
“This is the first time we have been faced with a hurricane that could disrupt our plans, but we plan to carry on and make every one of our planned stops,” Hanna said. “What better time to be here? Oftentimes when I come, you haven’t seen a hurricane. There is nothing brewing. And there’s nothing in the tropics. People wonder what am I going to talk about this time. Our message changes on every trip.”
