Houston pivots toward clean up, hopes for normalcy as Harvey moves on
As the water recedes in much of Houston, the city looks toward rebuilding.
Post to Facebook
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Join the Conversation
To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs
Houston pivots toward clean up, hopes for normalcy as Harvey moves on
Christopher Maag and Aamer Madhani, USA TODAY Network Published 10:31 a.m. CT Sept. 1, 2017 | Updated 2:17 p.m. CT Sept. 1, 2017
CLOSE
Mayor Sylvester Turner declared Houston "open for business" after taking an aerial tour of the flooding on Thursday. Officials say flood waters are expected to be gone from most of Houston and Harris County by late Friday or early Saturday. (Sept. 1) AP
Wet carpet, dry wall, and furniture sit outside of Frances Cirilo's home in East Houston.
(Photo: Danielle Parhizkaran, The Record and NorthJersey.com-USA TODAY NETWORK)
CONNECT TWEET LINKEDIN COMMENTEMAILMORE
HOUSTON — As floodwaters receded in the nation’s fourth largest city, residents and officials turned to picking up the pieces and finding a semblance of normalcy as the last remnants of catastrophic Hurricane Harvey moved on .  
Parts of east and west sides of the city remain underwater, but the rest of Houston has mostly dried out. Traffic is returning to the streets. Businesses are reopening. Even the baseball game will go on.
"The city of Houston is open for business,” said Mayor Sylvester Turner. “And quite frankly, we're open for business right now."
On Saturday, President Trump is expected to make his first visit to Houston in the aftermath of the storm. It will be the second trip to Texas in a matter of days by the president, who visited storm-battered Corpus Christi and huddled with Gov. Greg Abbott and state officials in Austin, the state capital, to discuss the recovery.
The Houston Astros, who rode out the storm in Tampa, will return to Houston's Minute Maid Park for a doubleheader on Saturday, playing their first home games since Harvey walloped the region.
Firefighters on Friday continued a block-by-block search of tens of thousands of Houston homes to search for survivors or bodies in some of the areas hardest hit by the storm. At least 39 people were killed along Harvey’s path with 25 of the dead in the Houston area.
Officials say flood waters should be gone from most of Houston and Harris County by late Friday or early Saturday. Jeff Lindner, meteorologist for the Harris County Flood Control District, said Harvey flooded an estimated 136,000 structures in Harris County, or 10% of all structures in the county database.
Abbott, the governor, cautioned  Friday that it will take years for Texas to dig out from this catastrophe
"This is going to be a massive, massive cleanup process," Abbott told ABC's "Good Morning America." "People need to understand this is not going to be a short-term project. This is going to be a multi-year project for Texas to be able to dig out of this catastrophe."
Those residents in the hardest hit areas in the city and neighboring communities – a whopping 70% of Harris County’s landmass was submerged by at least 18 inches of water – say it will be some time before they are able to return to their homes.
In the waterlogged Nottingham Fort neighborhood, near the Buffalo Bayou, homes and vehicles were submerged in several feet of water. Residents expect it will take weeks before the murky rain water completely recedes and they will be able to return to their homes.
Nottingham residents with homes on higher ground who were spared from the brunt of the storm have been working alongside impacted neighbors, wading into the brown waters to help salvage valuables and personal items.
“There’s an attitude in this state that I didn’t appreciate until I moved here” said Harry Lamberton, a Lone Star-state transplant who has spent the last several days helping neighbors who didn’t fare as well as him. “Big events like this – but also in the small sense – there is an attitude that when people are in need, people are willing to help. It’s why so many people who move here, like I did, find it such a great place to live.”
Jonathan Bates, right, sits in his yard after the flood waters receded in East Houston on Thursday. His friend, Corey Hines, came over to help pull out the wet carpet and furniture as they start to rebuild.
 (Photo: Danielle Parhizkaran, The Record and NorthJersey.com-USA TODAY NETWORK)
In East Houston’s Lakewood neighborhood, Jonathan Bates sat on the tailgate of a Dodge pickup, smoked Marlboro menthol cigarettes and took a break from hauling wet carpet out of his house on Linda Vista Drive.
Bates evacuated with his family Sunday through chest-high water. He returned Thursday afternoon to begin his recovery effort. He was uncertain if he would be able to save any furniture or if water damage would require him to rip out the walls.
“I ain’t gonna lie. I ain’t thought that far ahead,” said Bates, 49. “All I know is, this is going to take a long time. And it’s going to be expensive.”
A few doors down, Jackie Cirilo recruited an army of family members to start gutting her mother’s home. The group of young cousins took hammers to the walls, ripping out drywall from knee-height down. The men used shovels to scoop wet bits of wall into a repurposed garden wagon that they used to wheel the debris to the curb.
