1999
This page has been archived on the Web
Information identified as archived is provided for reference, research or recordkeeping purposes. It is not subject to the Government of Canada Web Standards and has not been altered or updated since it was archived. Please contact us to request a format other than those available.
Archived
Canadian Tropical Cyclone Season Summary for 1999
Prepared by: Peter Bowyer
The 1999 tropical cyclone season saw twelve named storms. Five entered the Canadian Hurricane Centre ( CHC ) Response Zone ( RZ ), and three of these entered the CHC Area of Responsibility.
1999 Storm Tracks Image
The remnants of a sixth storm moved over the region as well, resulting in strong winds and “1-in-100-year” rainfalls being greatly exceeded.
A total of 141 bulletins were issued by the CHC , making the 1999 season the busiest since 1995.
Bulletin Summaries for 1995-1999
 
Cindy (August 19–31)
Tropical Storm Cindy entered the extreme southeastern portion of the CHC RZ on August 31, but was downgraded shortly thereafter. Over the Southern Grand Banks of Newfoundland, peak winds of 115 km/h and maximum wave heights of 16.7 m were reported. No significant effects were felt over land.
Floyd (September 7–17)
Hurricane Floyd entered the CHC RZ during the evening of September 16, near the eastern coast of the United States, and was downgraded to a tropical storm thereafter. Floyd was further downgraded the following morning while over southern Maine. Despite intense media interest in this storm, few significant effects were felt over Canadian land. Maximum winds while crossing the CHC RZ were near 83 km/h with maximum seas of 8 to 9 m .
Gert (September 11–23)
Hurricane Gert entered the CHC RZ during the afternoon of September 22 and was downgraded to a tropical storm during the early morning hours of September 23 while passing about 110 km east of St. John’s, Newfoundland. Gert subsequently headed out over the Atlantic. Maximum winds of 125 km/h and maximum seas of 23.6 m were reported. An interesting feature of Gert was that it did not exhibit the often-observed post-tropical rain pattern. The main precipitation area was observed to the right of the storm’s track, instead of to the left, thereby producing no significant rainfalls over land. However, high waves and surf were responsible for considerable damage and property loss, particularly at St. Bride’s on the south coast of Newfoundland.
Harvey(September 21– 23)
Some of the most noteworthy events for Atlantic Canada during the 1999 tropical cyclone season occurred when the remnants of Tropical Storm Harvey moved through. After interacting with a mid-latitude trough, rainfalls measuring more than twice the “1-in-100-year” values were reported along with strong winds. Some areas of southeastern New Brunswick and northern Nova Scotia received over 250 mm of rain over a 30-hour period. Oxford, Nova Scotia reported 302 mm during the same time period. From 50 to 100 mm fell in Labrador.
Irene (October 13–19)
Hurricane Irene entered the CHC RZ near noon on October 18, then tracked across the southern marine areas, about 385 km south of Nova Scotia. Irene was downgraded to a tropical storm during the evening of October 18 and subsequently passed just southeast of Cape Race, Newfoundland, before moving rapidly off to the northeast. Numerous wind warnings (marine and public) and heavy rainfall warnings were issued by both the Newfoundland Weather Centre and the Maritimes Weather Centre. Maximum winds from Irene were near 98 km/h with a gust of 117 km/h along the east coast of Newfoundland. Rainfall amounts for the Atlantic coast of Nova Scotia and for eastern Newfoundland were in the 40 to 70 mm range. Maximum seas of 14.8 m were reported.
Jose (October 17–25)
Tropical Storm Jose entered the CHC RZ during the morning of October 25, passing about 675  km southeast of Sable Island before weakening over the Southern Grand Banks of Newfoundland. No effects were felt over land. There were, however, marine warnings issued for southern waters by both the Newfoundland Weather Centre and the Maritimes Weather Centre. Buoy reports showed maximum seas of 8.3 m as well as peak winds of 65 km/h . Estimates by the CHC , however, suggested maximum winds near Jose in excess of 100 km/h .
Date modified:
