Calhoun County braces for Hurricane Harvey
By MELONY OVERTON  and KAYLA MEYER
Aug 24, 2017
Email
Local shoppers bought bottled water and other supplies Wednesday afternoon at H-E-B Grocery in Port Lavaca in preparation for Hurricane Harvey, which was expected to make landfall on the Texas Coast by Friday. (Melony Overton/Wave photo)
Raymond Grant, left, and Rachel Grant, of Port Lavaca, stocked up on bottled water Wednesday afternoon at H-E-B in Port Lavaca as did other shoppers in preparation for Hurricane Harvey, which was expected to make landfall on the Texas Coast by Friday. (Melony Overton/Wave photo)
Save
Shoppers at H-E-B Grocery in Port Lavaca loaded their baskets with bottled water and other supplies Wednesday just before noon in preparation for Harvey.
“We have two trailer loads of water coming in to support anything that may happen here,” said Mario Chavana, store director, on Wednesday. “We are always prepared for the community to make sure we have product for everybody in our area. We have plenty of ice. We have dry ice coming. We have a generator if something happens.”
The National Hurricane Center classified Harvey as a hurricane Thursday around noon.
Chavana said H-E-B’s shelves have not been bare since people began shopping in earnest to prepare for the storm.
“They added two extra orders for us just to help us with the demand,” Chavana said.
Chavana said other product moving out of the store included canned meats, canned goods, bread, flashlights, batteries and baby supplies.
“It started picking up whenever the storm was announced. It kind of snuck up on everybody. It looks like it’s projected to come closer to us, so we are getting a huge increase in customers,” he said.
The National Weather Service initially classified Harvey as a tropical storm Aug. 18, and it had reached the Yucatan Peninsula area by Aug. 20.
By Wednesday, Harvey had regenerated near the Gulf of Mexico, and it was again named a tropical storm Wednesday evening. By noon Thursday, Harvey was became the third hurricane of the 2017 Atlantic Hurricane Season.
Just prior to Harvey being upgraded to a hurricane, county officials initiated a mandatory evacuation. A voluntary evacuation of low-lying areas was held the day prior.
Calhoun County Independent School District officials delayed the first day of school, initially slated for Aug. 28. The district announced Thursday it would be closed through Tuesday.Other officials, including those from area industry and medical facilities, said Wednesday and Thursday they were taking all the necessary precautions.
By noon Wednesday, Calhoun County Humane Society volunteer Melodie Griffin had found people to house 14 cats and a dozen dogs with the Port Lavaca Animal Control shelter. Griffin had a total of 30 dogs and 51 cats to find temporary shelter for before Hurricane Harvey was expected to make landfall on the Texas Coast Friday.
Griffin started looking for fosters Tuesday night, and calls from fosters began coming in by 8 a.m. Wednesday morning.
“We were worried about the cats. Getting dogs out is easy, but it’s getting these cats out that is really hard because people are like, ‘It’s a cat,’” she said. “The cats will go to a volunteer or a board member’s home. We will find a location. We won’t leave them here at the shelter. We are more worried about the amount of rainfall they are calling for because this building will take on water easy through the cinder blocks. It is not safe inside the building for them.”
“We will take calls until noon tomorrow at the latest because we don’t want people on the roads. There’s no telling when the storm is coming in, and we don’t want to take a chance. We want everyone to be home safe and sound when it blows in,” Griffin said.
After Calhoun County Commissioners Court announced a voluntary evacuation of the low-lying areas of the county, Brenda Hanselka, co-owner of the Indianola Fishing Marina at 8 Bell St. decided to move out appliances and product from the store starting Wednesday like she and co-owners husband Don Hanselka and brother-in-law Kerry Hanselka have done before previous storms.
“We’ve owned the store 13 years, and we’ve had to evacuate. This will be our fourth time. We evacuated for Hurricanes Ike, Frances and Andrew,” Brenda said.
Brenda filled large Rubbermaid tubs with product and loaded those onto trailers with coolers and freezers filled with product.
“Everything in the store is mobile. Some of it is on wheels. We take the trailers to Victoria where everything is kept in a farm shop. We plug in the coolers and the freezers and it keeps everything refrigerated,” Brenda said.
If the storm surge is over three feet, Brenda said water comes into the store.
“We are right on the water. It is the storm surge that gets us not the wind and rain,” she said.
Brenda said the store is built to coastal specifications, which makes for easy clean up after a storm.
“The building is made of marine plywood and anything electrical is 45 inches above the floor. If water gets in the store, it drains out. We Clorox it, hose it down and we’re ready to put everything back in place,” she said. “For Tropical Storm Bill, we raised things up eight inches, but the water came in six inches so we hosed everything down and put everything back.”
As of press time Thursday, Hurricane Harvey was gaining strength in the Gulf of Mexico with weather officials predicting winds up to 115 mph, a storm surge of six to 10 feet and 15 to 20 inches of rain fall with isolated areas getting up to 30 inches.
John Metz, warning coordination meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Corpus Christi, said rainfall totals have the potential to be life threatening and devastating with record flooding possible.
For the latest information on Hurricane Harvey, visit The Wave online at www.portlavacawave.com and be sure to check The Wave’s Facebook page.
