Red Cross floundered in Hurricane Harvey relief effort, Texas leaders, residents say
Hurricane Harvey presented the American Red Cross a chance at redemption.
Post to Facebook
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
28
To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs
Red Cross floundered in Hurricane Harvey relief effort, Texas leaders, residents say
USA Today Network Sean Rossman, Eleanor Dearman and John C Moritz , USA TODAY Published 5:19 p.m. ET Nov. 7, 2017 | Updated 6:12 p.m. ET Nov. 7, 2017
CLOSE
For the American Red Cross, Hurricane Harvey presented a perfect chance at redemption, an opportunity to make up for concerns the organization was not rising to the occasion when people most needed them.But that wouldn’t be the story for everyone. Rachel Denny Clow/Corpus Christi Caller-Times
Hurricane volunteers are briefed at the George Brown Convention Center in Houston, which turned into an American Red Cross shelter after Hurricane Harvey tore through the Texas Gulf Coast in late August.
(Photo: Erich Schlegel, Getty Images)
CONNECT TWEET 13 LINKEDIN 28 COMMENTEMAILMORE
For the American Red Cross, Hurricane Harvey presented a perfect chance at redemption.
A fast and efficient response would have shown critics the organization has learned from its past mistakes and is a capable partner when disaster strikes. But instead, say many Texas officials and residents, the Red Cross floundered and failed to provide needed help.
Weeks after the storm, state and local officials, including Gov. Greg Abbott, complain of a charity disorganized and slow-to-respond. The Red Cross’ leader in the region hardest hit has resigned, complaining of a constant struggle to juggle the wants of the national office versus the needs of hurricane survivors. And many of those survivors have a long list of complaints. 
The post-Harvey rancor has left the group synonymous with volunteerism and selflessness again on its heels, forced to reconcile negative reports on the ground with its reputation as the go-to during America’s worst moments.
Aubrey Dominguez returned to find his Rockport home completely gone, but was denied Red Cross assistance. "They are good at driving around giving out hot meals," he said. "Other than that, that's about it."
One Texas lawmaker who represents a section of rain-pummeled Houston, where thousands of people lost their homes and belongings to Harvey's floods, said he's had enough with the missteps and confusion.
“I just won’t give the Red Cross any more money,” said state Rep. Garnet Coleman, a Democrat who has served 26 years in the Texas House. "I'll find other ways to help people in need."
In recent years, the Red Cross’ reputation has taken repeated hits, spearheaded by reporting from NPR and ProPublica  that highlighted lapses in how the organization spends its money and directs its resources. Then, a Congressional inquiry found the organization was using about a quarter of the money directed to the 2010 Haiti earthquake for other expenses. It also faces dwindling revenues, a smaller workforce and fewer volunteers than it did just a few years ago.
Read more: The cost of Harvey recovery will be staggering, lawmakers learn
This round of criticism comes as the organization juggles a number of major disasters, from the hurricane trio of Harvey, Irma and Maria, to California wildfires and the mass shooting in Las Vegas.
As for Harvey, the Red Cross described its response as “massive,” one that fulfilled its mission considering the historic nature of the storm, which dropped more than 50 inches of rain.
“In a disaster, you don’t get everything perfect every time,” said spokeswoman Elizabeth Penniman, “but the incredible number of people we sheltered and meals we served and comfort and care we provided prove we fulfilled our mission, and some of the criticism does not take into account the size and scale of our response.”
Bob Ottenhoff, the CEO and president of the Center for Disaster Philanthropy, said the Harvey response proved to be a huge challenge for relief organizations, but called it overall "pretty good." Still, it’s not over.
"The challenge confronting us now and the thing that often proves to be very frustrating to homeowners and business owners, is the fact that the recovery period is so complicated and so long," he said. "There's a tremendous amount of work before us that is going to be very difficult."
Gripes on the ground
Category 4 Harvey punished the small coastal town of Port Aransas, where 130-mph winds pushed boats into parking lots, destroyed buildings and sawed through trailer parks.
While some local officials were pleased with the Red Cross response, others argue more could have been done on the ground. Consider Port Aransas Mayor Charles Bujan part of the latter group.
“I don’t want them ever to come back here,” he said. “They’re supposed to help the people. They didn’t do that.”
Much of his criticism centers on the Red Cross’ dispersal of funds and the fact that he said it took a couple weeks into the recovery process “before they even set up shop.”
As a first step in recovery plans, the Red Cross offered $400 funding payments meant to address immediate needs, like clothing and food, for disaster survivors. Some applications were thought to be mistakenly rejected due to technological issues . Penniman said the initial demand "challenged our IT infrastructure," leading to a temporary suspension in service.
Gov. Abbott said he had “several conversations” with Red Cross President Gail McGovern about reports that the charity was fumbling the ball as Texans suffered.
Gov. Greg Abbott looks over  damaged stores in Rockport, TX, during a tour on Monday, August 28, 2017, two days after Hurricane Harvey hit the town.
 (Photo: Courtney Sacco/Corpus Christi Caller-Times, Courtney Sacco/Caller-Times)
“I did express concern that the money that was donated to go to Harvey relief was not getting into the hands of the people who needed it — and about some of the slowness with regards to the funds,” Abbott said last week.  “I heard multiple concerns raised by people at local levels that they were not receiving the aid that they seemed to be expecting from Red Cross."
He said the charity was a doing "good job" at some shelters in San Antonio, Austin and Houston, but other problems were evident.
“I know there was a lot of money, as in hundreds of millions of dollars of money that was available for Texans that seemed not to be getting to Texans in neither a timely fashion nor in a well-organized, well-directed fashion,” Abbott said. 
Cyndi Lee, who has lived in Aransas Pass for about 25 years, evacuated during the storm to a shelter in Austin that the Red Cross was helping to operate. While she saw no problems there and was “thankful for what they did in the moment,” getting her $400 was "a little chaotic.”
Cyndi Lee has first hand experience both with a shelter in Austin and getting financial assistance from the American Red Cross. Lee, who has lived in Aransas Pass for about 25 years, evacuated during the storm to a shelter in Austin that Red Cross was helping to operate. After registering her dog as a service dog, inspectors took issue with it and a Red Cross official worked with her family to pay for a hotel for three days so that she could stay with her dog.
 (Photo: Rachel Denny Clow/Corpus Christi Caller-Times)
Nueces County Judge Loyd Neal and Mike Koerner, Aransas County's long-term recovery manager, were pleased with the work. Aransas Pass Mayor Ramiro Gomez was happy the Red Cross delivered hot meals, but lamented: “I wish we would have gotten more.”
Penniman said the charity is working with Texas officials to ensure it is fulfilling its obligations to the state. In the Red Cross' monthly newsletter, McGovern said she was gratified to see the charity's volunteers "doing everything in their power" to help Harvey survivors.
"I’m proud of the work we’re doing to help individuals and families impacted by this catastrophic storm — and our efforts are far from over," McGovern wrote. "I am profoundly grateful to the dedicated volunteers, donors and community partners who empower our vital mission.”
Local or national control?
The Red Cross' focus during a disaster is on shelter, food and emergency relief supplies, among other duties. Its 270 chapters provide the immediate response while operating off a “clear framework” which provides chapters the flexibility to meet local needs while “maintaining consistent services to support our mission,” Penniman said.
When a situation requires a national-level response, such as in Harvey, oversight shifts to Red Cross headquarters in Washington, D.C. 
David Brady, the ex-CEO of the Red Cross’ Texas Gulf Coast region, which serves places like Houston, Galveston and Corpus Christi, found such an arrangement to be a struggle. After he resigned, he spilled his feelings on Facebook. 
David Brady
 (Photo: Red Cross Houston Twitter page)
“My challenge was a daily struggle to do what is best and serve the national organization that pays my salary and doing what is best and serving my fellow Texans and this community I love so much,” the Facebook post said, according to KHOU-TV in Houston . “I found myself in disagreement too often with decisions that were being made as it related to Hurricane Harvey recovery.”
In confirming Brady’s resignation, Penniman said, “we are grateful for his contributions to the Texas Gulf Coast region over the past several months.”
Will it get better?
Heather Howard tries to get her daughter, Emma Howard, 2, to nap while waiting to evacuate from Corpus Christi, TX as Hurricane Harvey nears the coast on Friday, August 25, 2017. The family wasn't originally planning on evacuating, but they live in a suggested evacuation zone and with five kids and a mom who is 76, she decided it was a good idea to leave this morning.
 (Photo: Rachel Denny Clow/Corpus Christi Caller-Times)
In recent years, the Red Cross has watched its resources shrink.
From 2008 to 2016, tax records show the organization saw a 41% percent dip in employees, and revenue fell by nearly $700 million to about $2.6 billion as volunteers more than halved from about 662,000 to 314,000. 
That goes against the current trend, Ottenhoff said. Relief organizations are seeing more and more volunteers. 
Donations nowadays are more directed to local relief organizations rather than large ones, said Charity Navigator spokeswoman Sara Nason. The website, which evaluates charities and facilitates donations during disasters, directed about $3.1 million in the 17 days after Harvey to organizations supporting the relief effort. The majority went to small organizations in Texas. 
"A lot of individuals we saw were looking to donate specifically to local organizations because they saw the value of this long-term commitment to the area," she said.
Penniman seemed to dismiss any notion that the lower numbers have affected the charity’s response. The Red Cross operates in 90% of America’s counties, she said, and has grown more efficient and effective through technology.
Roughly 9,500 Red Cross disaster workers assisted with Harvey — 110 are still there — and the organization raised $429 million, more than was raised during Hurricane Sandy. Its financial assistance program has provided $400 payments to 573,000 people, equal to $229 million. That leaves about $200 million in the coffers. An estimated budget of its Harvey expenses at the end of September showed 91% of the funds will go to programs and expenses. 
“We have spent more money on more people in a shorter time period than any disaster response since Hurricane Katrina,” Penniman said.
Ottenhoff said government and nonprofits are better organized and more sophisticated at disaster response than they were 10 or 20 years ago, partly because of lessons learned after Hurricanes Andrew and Katrina. The Red Cross, Penniman said, is a “learning organization” that’s always looking to improve.
In the meantime, frustration remains.
“They have such a bad reputation in this community that it would be better for them not to come back,” said Bujan, the Port Aransas mayor.
Port Aransas resident Julie Gall, after being denied once, was approved for her $400 in late September. Over a month later, she still hasn't received the money and hasn't heard back from the Red Cross, despite sending multiple emails asking for updates.
"It was empty promises," she said.
Sean Rossman reported from McLean, Va. Eleanor Dearman reports for the Corpus Christi Caller-Times and John C Moritz is the Texas state capitol correspondent in Austin for the USA TODAY Network. This story was produced in partnership with the  Ravitch Fiscal Reporting Program  at the  CUNY Graduate School of Journalism .
