Activate your digital access.
TAMU-CC drone team helps with Hurricane Harvey recovery efforts
Matt Woolbright , Corpus Christi Caller-Times Published 5:22 p.m. CT Sept. 6, 2017 | Updated 8:41 a.m. CT Sept. 7, 2017
CLOSE
Hurricane Harvey has devastated parts of Texas. A birds-eye view of the damage shows the full impact of the storm. USA TODAY
Damage from Holiday Beach caused by Hurricane Harvey.
(Photo: Lone Star UAS Texas A&M Corpus Christi)
CONNECT TWEET LINKEDIN COMMENTEMAILMORE
As Texas begins to assess damage and recover from Hurricane Harvey, a team from Texas A&M Corpus Christi is using drones to speed up the process and lower costs for hard-hit areas.
Jerry Hendrix, executive director of Texas A&M Corpus Christi's Lone Star UAS (unmanned aerial system) program, said the trial is an indicator of how government entities will respond to storms in the future.
"Like police officers are trained to work in K-9 unites, there will be search and rescue professionals trained to use drones," Hendrix said. "Right now it's just in the test phase and not widely used, but it will be."
So far, the Corpus Christi-based team has operated in three roles related to Hurricane Harvey: evaluating conditions in the Corpus Christi ship channel, assessing damage in Aransas County and checking on dams and infrastructure in Fort Bend County, Hendrix said.
"It's cheaper to do it this way, and we keep the pilot and crew out of harm's way," said Mike Menard, the chief test pilot at Lone Star UAS.
additional advantage for the smaller aircraft over helicopters is an ability to fly lower and closer to obstacles to get better vantage points on conditions on the ground, Menard explained.
For example, in Holiday Beach, some homes look undamaged from high above, but from a lower vantage point a washed-out lower level becomes visible. In Aransas County, the team is taking broad videos for the county so they can get a quick understanding of the degree of damage.
In some cases, the widespread destruction from Hurricane Harvey cannot be appreciated from the ground like it can from above, Hendrix said.
"Some areas look like a war zone without the craters," he said. "Some vacant lots look fine, but you realize there were houses there before."
“"Some areas look like a war zone without the craters. Some vacant lots look fine, but you realize there were houses there before."”
Jerry Hendrix, executive director of Texas A&M Corpus Christi's Lone Star UAS (unmanned aerial system) program
Still, the team is committed to flying free of charge as a way of giving back to the community.
"We're going to continue to fly for the county assessors until they say they have enough," Hendrix said.
The 18-person team is one of six universities across the country chosen by the Federal Aviation Administration to test drone platforms and help the federal government  identify an appropriate implementation plan for drone-specific regulations.
As part of the partnership, the FAA granted the team unique privileges for operating during Hurricane Harvey recovery efforts, Hendrix explained. 
Some examples are being able to operate in airspace that is otherwise restricted for drone pilots, such as all of Fulton and much of Rockport. They are also allowed to fly over people and permitted to fly without maintaining a visual line of sight on the aircraft.
The team is scheduled to survey the damage to downtown areas of Rockport and Fulton later this week.
 
Read or Share this story: http://callertim.es/2xQbkF6
From The USA TODAY NETWORK
These sites are part of the USA TODAY NETWORK. Their content is produced independently from our newsrooms.
