BEEVILLE – When disaster strikes Bee County, usually the members of the Beeville Volunteer Fire Department lead the community’s emergency response.
When Hurricane Harvey hit Friday night the situation was no different.
Fire Chief Bill Burris pointed to some bunks and cots at the C.M. “Smitty” Smith Central Fire Station on West Cleveland Street Saturday morning and said six firefighters had spent the night with their families at the station.
“There were 22 adults and 10 children,” Burris said.
“It’s still here,” Burris said of Hurricane Harvey at about 9:30 a.m. Saturday.
“We were answering calls all night. We’re still answering calls. It was non-stop. The men and women are tired.”
There was still a sizable contingent of firefighters, auxiliary members and others at the station as Burris answered questions about the previous night.
The storm had blasted Beeville Friday evening, and by the time the sun came up Saturday morning the community had been hit hard.
“Most of the calls were downed power lines,” Burris said.
As he commented, calls were still coming in about problems with power lines.
In some parts of town, overhead lines were drooping and creating traffic hazards.
The BVFD had stationed vehicles at several locations to keep motorists from driving into the wires.
City Manager William “Bill” DiLibero announced Friday evening that the streets of the city would be “closed” at 9 o’clock.
Basically, that was a curfew for anyone who had no business being out on the streets at that time. Most businesses in town had closed by that time and sent their employees home to ride out the storm.
Some residents chose to leave town and head inland. But most Bee County residents stayed home.
Anyone listening to a police scanner during and after the storm would agree with Burris. The calls concerning trees in power lines causing the wires to spark were common. Other calls involved power lines that were down on the ground.
Burris cautioned all residents Monday morning to stay away from any fallen power line.
“This article won’t come out until Wednesday,” Burris said. “But it would still be a good idea to tell anyone who sees a power line down to assume it’s hot.”
Several areas of the city lost electricity. Others experienced a blink or two in their power, but it stayed on most of the time.
The National Weather Service had warned that Harvey was expected to be a wet storm because it had been stalled off the coast by the high pressure system.
That allowed the storm to suck up huge amounts of water from the gulf and to intensify to a Category 4 storm before coming ashore.
Weather forecasters were predicting Friday that when the storm hit Bee County it would only be a Category 1 storm.
However, Burris confirmed that wind gusts had been recorded in Beeville at 100 mph by Saturday morning.
Also, residents reported that parts of the city had received four inches of rain. However, it was the way the rain came that led to a lot of the tree damage.
Retired Fire Chief Donnie Morris, who suspended his retirement when the storm hit, explained why the storm knocked down so many trees in the county.
He said that the prevailing winds, usually coming from the gulf, create a situation that causes trees to grow stronger root systems on the south side. However, the root systems on the north side of the trees are not as strong and deep.
Then, he said, add to that a slow, steady rain that soaks into the soil rather than run off it, and you get deeply saturated dirt around the roots.
Those 100 mph gusts were enough to push many trees out of the ground, bringing the roots with them.
If the winds alone were not enough to blow down power lines, trees leaning into the wires helped.
By Monday morning most of the emergency calls to the BVFD had ended, although residents were still reporting sparking power lines.
By then, Burris said, most of the power lines that were knocked down should have been repaired.
“But if you see a power line down, assume it is live,” he said. “Don’t touch it.”
By Monday afternoon, firefighters were back in action when a dispatcher with the Beeville Police Department called for volunteers to help unload nursing home patients being brought in on buses and in vans from nursing homes in the Houston area.
The nursing home situation around the Bayou City became well known when a photo taken at one of the facilities showed elderly patients sitting in waist-deep water waiting to be rescued.
The two nursing facilities in Beeville, Hacienda Oaks and Woodridge, were going to take in about 70 of the evacuees.
The firefighters were joined by volunteers from the City of Beeville Public Works Department and concerned citizens.
Then, overnight Monday and early Tuesday, the first of what could end up being hundreds of semi-truck rigs started arriving at the Chase Field Industrial and Airport Complex.
Bee Development Authority Executive Director Joe B. Montez said he was contacted Monday and told that the Federal Emergency Management Agency and Texas Department of Public Safety would be using the former naval air station as a staging area for hurricane relief to the Coastal Bend Region of the Gulf Coast.
More than 50 big rigs were parked at the facility with equipment like electrical generators, meals, water, medical supplies and other items that FEMA officials were planning to send into the hurricane damaged areas.
Coastal cities like Aransas Pass, Rockport and Port Aransas had been devastated by the storm.
Sixteen fuel trucks were lined up near Hangar 24 on the property. Montez said restrooms and hangar bays would serve both operations there and in Hangar 26.
Officials spearheading the operation said that hundreds of big rig trucks could be passing through Chase Field in the days ahead.
Although the sun was shining by Tuesday morning, and Bee County residents were out with chain saws, rakes and wheelbarrows for the cleanup here, much of Houston and surrounding communities were still under water.
President Donald Trump and Texas Gov. Greg Abbott were saying that the storm that hit the Texas coast was historical in its strength.
Both were predicting that recovery will take years and, in some areas, the situation will never be the same.
Gary Kent is a reporter at the Bee-Picayune and can be reached at 358-2550, ext. 120, or at reporter@mySouTex.com .
