Evacuees return home post Hurricane Harvey
By MELONY OVERTON
Email
Mary Ann Orta, human resources coordinator for Calhoun County, greeted an emotional Delia Ramos of Port Lavaca Friday, Sept. 1 at the Bauer Community Center. Ramos was the first of the county’s Hurricane Harvey evacuees to exit the Calhoun County Independent School District bus. She and 53 other evacuees stayed in shelters in New Braunfels and in San Antonio. (Melony Overton/Wave photo)
Calhoun County residents who evacuated for Hurricane Harvey were returned to the Bauer Community Center by the County Friday, Sept. 1 on two Calhoun County Independent School District buses. About 54 evacuees were bused to shelters in New Braunfels and San Antonio. (Melony Overton/Wave photo)
Save
Delia Ramos, of Port Lavaca, stepped off of a Calhoun County Independent School District bus Friday, Sept. 1, and her tears alone told the story of a woman who fled Hurricane Harvey now called the worst natural disaster in U.S. history.
Mary Ann Orta, the human resources coordinator for Calhoun County, greeted Ramos in the Bauer Community Center parking lot with a long embrace as both women continued to weep.
“I am thankful because they took care of my dogs,” Ramos said as she gathered her belongings on the center sidewalk and checked on her pets.
Calhoun County Sheriff’s Office and the Port Lavaca Police Department were available to give 35 of the initial 54 evacuees, some with multiple pets, a ride home.
“I am glad I’m home. Next time I will not leave,” Ramos said. “I can’t deal with this. I’m sick. I didn’t have my medicines out there, and that made it worse, because they don’t prescribe for pain management out there. I suffered, and I’ve been in a lot of pain.”
Juan Martinez, of Port Lavaca, had a better shelter experience than Ramos.
“They treated us beautifully. There was nothing negative about the people over there,” Martinez said. “We had people all the way from New York come down and take care of us.”
Martinez said while in San Antonio the evacuees were able to have a close-to-normal routine as possible even getting out of the shelter to go shopping.
“Everything was real good, as a matter of fact it was better to be there than be at home,” he said. “I got lost one night, and the San Antonio police made sure I made it back.”
Martinez was given three meals a day and more to eat, opportunities to shower and clothes donations.
“They provided everything for us. I was able to stay in touch with family. They provided a telephone for us,” he said.
This was Martinez’s first time to evacuate for a hurricane.
“The police department told me that it was best for me to do it. I tried to argue with them, but now that I did it, I enjoyed it,” he said. “I’m really glad they told me to. I’m glad I listened to them for once.”
Orta, who is with the Calhoun County Emergency Management Office, and who helped orchestrate the evacuation, grew attached to the evacuees and anticipated their safe return.
“Not all of them are coming back. The others must have checked themselves out,” Orta said.  
 Rachel Morales, who is the Calhoun County 911 coordinator, had a truck bed full of care packages for the evacuees donated by the Calhoun County Ministerial Alliance and emergency management’s donation distribution center at First United Methodist Church of Port Lavaca.
“I wanted to make sure they weren’t coming back to nothing. They needed to be given something,” Morales said. “If they had the money to go to Walmart or H-E-B they would do it, but they didn’t have the money to leave town. They are going to need supplies.”
“A gentleman who came from Florida brought dog food and cat food, so we included that in the care package for 14 dogs and one cat so we made sure their animals have food as well so they don’t have to think of anything,” Morales said.
“My parents are no longer with us, but if they were, and we couldn’t help them, I would hope someone would step up and help them,” she said. “We’re supposed to help. We all had a job to do, and we did it,” Morales said of County officials and staff.
 Orta took names of the residents as they came off the buses.
“Initially, they were taken to a middle school in New Braunfels, but they had to be moved because they were ready to start school,” Orta said. “They were moved to San Antonio.”
“It’s a good thing,” Orta said with a sigh of relief. “It just says that we made it. As soon as they are home and back in their normal routine the better. We were on our knees, but we’re standing now. It just means that the storm is over, that everybody made it with no fatalities.”
