Update on AEP Texas Hurricane Harvey Restoration
Posted:
(AEP Texas Facebook)
CORPUS CHRISTI -
AEP Texas reports that approximately 133,600 customers in the Coastal Bend area remained without power as of noon on Tuesday as a result of Hurricane Harvey.   That number compares with the 220,000 consumers left without power at the peak of outages, which occurred at 2 p.m. on Saturday.  
Crews continue to clear downed power lines and other hazards while restoring power to priority services such as hospitals, water treatment plants and other facilities.  The crews also continue to work 14-to-16 hour days to meet estimated time of restoration (ETR) projections released on Sunday.  (See those projections below.) 
“We are working to reduce the number of hazard tickets; however, we’re facing hundreds of down power lines, as well utility poles damaged by the storm,” said Tom Coad, AEP Texas vice president of Distribution Region Operations.  “Currently there are nearly 4,400 hazard tickets still being addressed throughout the Coastal Bend area and approximately 2,600 in Corpus Christi alone. We know that customers are concerned about these hazards, and we are trying to get each one as quickly as possible.  Please continue to treat any downed line as energized and dangerous.  If you have not already reported the situation, please call 1-866-223-8508. Also, please supervise children and pets when outdoors.” 
AEP Texas estimates that at least 2,100 utility poles and 55 transmission structures were damaged or knocked down by the storm.  Most of the utility poles were knocked down.   Crews had reactivated 40 circuit breakers by Monday afternoon, and approximately 146 circuit breakers remained off line. 
The crews also are working to bring 55 transmission lines back into service, primarily in the Corpus Christi area.  Service has been restored to 21 substations of the 44 out of service and ten transmission lines serving the area.
Estimated Restoration Times
AEP Texas projects that by Wednesday August 30 at 10 p.m. crews will have restored power to 95 percent of the customers within the City of Corpus Christi, as well as the Sinton area.
Restoration dates and times are still to be determined for Rockport, Aransas Pass, Port Aransas, Fulton, Woodsboro, Port Lavaca, Lamar and Bayside. The devastation in those communities was the most extreme and will require the most amount of repairs. The damage assessment will continue in those areas, and an estimated time of restoration (ETR) will be developed when that assessment is completed.
A mandatory evacuation of Matagorda County earlier on Monday means that an estimated time of restoration for Bay City has been put on hold for now.  Once the state-ordered evacuation is lifted, crews and assessors will be able to re-enter the area, complete their assessment; develop an ETR and resume the overall restoration effort.
Restoration for all other cities and surrounding areas impacted by the storm is expected to reach the 95 percent completion level by 10 p.m. on Saturday September 2, if not sooner.  This means if a city is not among those  listed above (Corpus Christi, the Sinton area and the areas most devastated by the storm), the ETR for that area is 10 p.m. on Saturday, if not sooner.
Weather continues to play a role in the current restoration plans.  Flooding and newly ordered mandatory evacuations in parts of the AEP Texas service territory may impact projected ETRs. Work will continue until service has been restored to all customers impacted by the storm.  The 95 percent target is cited because at that point, some normal day-to-day operations can resume as crews continue to restore power to the remaining customers without service.  
Resources committed to the restoration effort
AEP Texas currently has approximately 3,600 personnel committed to the storm restoration effort, and that number is expected to increase to approximately 4,600 over the next few days.  Crews from Kentucky, Illinois, Missouri and other states have arrived and are working on restoring power to those impacted by Hurricane Harvey.
Outage breakdown as of Noon 8-29-2017
Aransas Pass – Rockport Area                    42,800
Corpus Christi                                                45,700
