More: Watch out for Hurricane Harvey donation scams. Disasters bring out the crooks.
Scott’s phone got water damaged when he was heading for a vehicle to get him out of the rain and the path of flooding.
“I really thought my phone was through,” he said. He and his family have been staying at the convention center since last Friday, but he hadn’t been able to reach extended family in Louisiana to tell them everyone was ok.
Craig Beinecke puts a cell phone into the TekDry drying machine in Denver.
 (Photo: Trevor Hughes/USA TODAY)
TekDry offers phone and electronics services at about 600 sites nationwide, mostly in Staples stores. They typically charge $69.99 if they get your phone working again.
The company has six locations in the Dallas area, but none in Houston. When CEO Adam Cookson realized the extent of the disaster in Houston, he and another staffer loaded up a truck with a generator, two drying machines, a bunch of phone charging stations and bottled water and started driving from Denver.
They arrived at the convention Wednesday afternoon around 3 p.m.
“We had barely set up when a line formed,” Cookson said.
A Red Cross worker who gave her name only as Louise, whose phone was the first to be dried out and made functional again at the TexDry portable phone drying truck outside Houston's George R. Brown convention Center.
 (Photo: TekDry)
A TV crew lent them power from their generator, and the team started drying out phones, a 30-minute process that involves putting them under pressure in a heated box to boil off the water at low temperatures that don’t damage the electronics.
They finally closed up shop at 10:30 Wednesday night, having dried out close to 20 phones.
"Phones are clearly important to people. One thing that surprised me was how many of them wanted a picture taken of us giving them their phone back. It really brought home how crucial they are in people's lives," Cookson said.
In general, TekDry finds it can save about 50% of phones if they’re brought into one of its service centers within 36 hours. In the case of phones dunked during Hurricane Harvey, most have been wet for days, and their owners also tried to turn them on, both of which lower the chance of saving the phone.
Saturday was their last day in Houston. Phones that had been drenched during the storm and floods were reaching the limit of when they could be saved, as most had gotten wet between five and seven days before.
Cookson said his team had learned a lot and now knows how to be even more effective "when this kind of large situational need unfortunately arises again,” he said.
Phones lined up to be dried out and (hopefully) once again functional at a make-shift drying station created by Denver-based company TekDry outside the George R. Brown convention center in Houston, Texas.
 (Photo: Adam Cookson)
Other local drying shops are also offering free services. DryBox, a San Antonio-based company, is waiving the $39.95 charge at its 11 Houston-area self-service stations at H.E.B. stores. Users can enter promotion code HARVEY.
Gregory Stanton, 62, couldn't connect with his family after he lost his home to the floods. 
“I was leaving on a boat when they were rescuing me and my family, and my phone dropped in the water. It was up to my neck so it was in there for a while before we found it,” he said.
That was on Sunday. Wednesday night he got his phone back.
“The first person I called was my mom to see if she was OK, then my sister. They were worried about me and I was worried about them. Now my aunts are calling me,” he said.
Not everyone is so lucky. David Runels, 55, was hoping against hope his phone could be brought back to life after it slipped out of his jacket pocket when he was helping his seven family members out of their flooded house and into a boat to get to shelter last week.
“I haven’t had a phone so I couldn’t call my boss. I need to call to find out if I still have a job,” said Runels, who delivers pizza for Domino’s.
Unfortunately, his phone was too damaged and didn’t survive the dunking.
He said he’d have to find a store where he could buy another one, though the $100 cost wasn’t going to be easy to come up with.
“But at least we’re all OK,” he said.
 
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2esYCau
From The USA TODAY NETWORK
These sites are part of the USA TODAY NETWORK. Their content is produced independently from our newsrooms.
