Photo Gallery
Hurricane Franklin hits Mexico
In Veracruz, there were many fallen trees and isolated power outages. Banana plantations, the main source of income for locals, were also damaged with workers reporting total losses.
Hurricane Franklin in Mexico
Franklin, the first hurricane of the 2017 Atlantic season, has dissipated over Mexico, the US National Hurricane Centre said on Thursday.
In Veracruz, there were many fallen trees, isolated power outages, damage to homes. Banana plantations, a main source of income for locals, were also damaged with workers reporting total losses. (AFP)
Save for Later
Heavy rains in central Mexico
Meanwhile, in the town of Huauchinango, in the central state of Puebla, people were seen staying at shelters. State governor, Tony Gali, reported a total of 1,562 people had been evacuated from their homes. Food, blankets, mattresses, toiletries, bottled water are being distributed among the needy taking refuge from the storm.
Heavy rains continue to fall over central Mexico, raising the risk of flash floods and mudslides in the mountainous terrain, with residents being drenched in colonial towns around central parts of the country. (AFP)
Save for Later
Life threatening flash floods
Franklin was packing maximum sustained winds of 140 kilometres per hour when it struck the coast, the NHC said.
Three hours later, it weakened into a tropical storm as it moved inland, still bringing heavy rain and dangerous winds of 70 miles per hour.
"These rains are capable of producing life threatening flash floods and mudslides," the NHC warned. (AFP)
Save for Later
Soldiers carry out preventive evacuations
In nearby Puebla, state authorities prepared shelters for nearly 100,000 people who could be affected by the storm.
Soldiers and sailors also carried out preventive evacuations in the mountains of Puebla, where authorities fear that heavy rain could cause deadly landslides. (AFP)
Save for Later
Yucatan peninsula
Franklin struck the Yucatan peninsula in eastern Mexico on Monday, and crossed the peninsula into the Gulf of Mexico on Tuesday.
Mexico's long eastern coastline is often struck by storms during the Atlantic hurricane season.
The season runs from June 1 through November 30 although hurricanes may also occur outside this period. (AFP)
