Charting Hurricane Harvey's jaw-dropping size and destruction
Much of that damage is occurring in areas like Friendswood, which are not in a FEMA-designated "special flood hazard area" that require flood insurance to obtain federally insured mortgages.
A little more than half of residential and commercial properties in the Houston metro area that are at "high" or "moderate" risk of flooding during Harvey are in areas that do not require owners to carry flood insurance, according to an analysis by CoreLogic, a global property information and data firm.
While Houston and its surrounding communities are rapidly growing in population, the area has 25,000 fewer flood-insured properties than it did five years ago, according to an Associated Press review of FEMA data.
Part of the reason for the dropoff may be due to Congress’ decision in 2012 to raise premiums for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). More than 90% of all flood insurance policies in the country are issued by NFIP.
Much of Southeast Texas was not considered on FEMA-mapped zones as at risk of flooding despite a rapid increase in population in Houston since 2000. That surge of people pressured the area's drainage systems.
"It’s unprecedented on so many different levels," said Steve Bowen, a director and meteorologist at Aon. "Unfortunately, we are going to see that an abnormally high rate of economic damage is uninsured."
Tony Graham, 56, whose home was filled with 18 inches of water, said big storms have flooded the streets of his subdivision in the past,  but the water always stopped far short of his and his neighbors’ doorsteps.
Tony Graham begins the cleanup process in his Friendswood, Texas home on Wedneday, the day after he was forced to evacuate because of rising floodwater in his neighborhood.
 (Photo: SCOTT CLAUSE / USATODAY Network)
Graham and his wife, Trina, evacuated their home by boat Tuesday afternoon after the waters had risen to the bottom of the stop sign across the street from their house.
By Wednesday morning, the water had receded from their neighborhood and they were back in the house, ripping out carpets, baseboards and Sheetrock to prevent mold from festering in their floors and walls. Friends from Louisiana were expected to arrive by Thursday with dehumidifiers and more supplies.
“We didn’t have flood insurance, because where we live, we didn’t expect we’d need it,” Graham said. “We’re used to storms, but nothing like this.”
Yu reported from McLean, Va. Contributing: Doyle RIce in McLean.
Follow USA TODAY's Aamer Madhani and Roger Yu on Twitter:  @AamerISmad  and @byRogerYu  
Flooded homes are shown on Aug. 30, 2017, near Lake Houston following Hurricane Harvey.
 (Photo: Win McNamee, Getty Images)
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2xPoMbk
From The USA TODAY NETWORK
These sites are part of the USA TODAY NETWORK. Their content is produced independently from our newsrooms.
