Activate your digital access.
Harvey timeline: See how the storm developed and marched across Texas and Louisiana
Allison Ehrlich , Corpus Christi Caller-Times Published 10:03 p.m. CT Sept. 2, 2017 | Updated 9:35 a.m. CT Sept. 7, 2017
Buy Photo
Men help board windows at a home as Hurricane Harvey approaches the area on Ocean Drive on Thursday, Aug. 24, 2017, in Corpus Christi.
(Photo: Gabe Hernandez/Caller-Times)Buy Photo
CONNECT TWEET LINKEDIN COMMENTEMAILMORE
Learn about Harvey's development from a tropical wave to Category 4 hurricane and eventual dissipation over the course of 19 days.
Sunday, Aug. 13
Tropical wave emerges off west coast of Africa and merges with area of low pressure near the Cabo Verde Islands. Heads west over Atlantic Ocean.
Thursday, Aug. 17
National Hurricane Center identifies low-pressure area east of the Lesser Antilles as potential tropical depression nine. By 5 p.m. Atlantic Standard Time identified as Tropical Storm Harvey and heading for the Windward Islands.
Data from USAF hurricane hunter plane invest of Potential Tropical Cyclone #Nine arriving at NHC's CARCAH unit https://t.co/ynkAzxhQja pic.twitter.com/6cbOno5Z1s
— Natl Hurricane Ctr (@NWSNHC) August 17, 2017
Friday, Aug. 18
Tropical Storm Harvey passes over the Windward Islands with maximum sustained winds of 40 mph. Enters the eastern Caribbean Sea.
Saturday, Aug. 19
Harvey weakens to a tropical depression, then a tropical wave.
Tuesday, Aug. 22
Remnants of Harvey move across Yucatan Peninsula.
Wednesday, Aug. 23
Harvey regenerates into tropical depression. Hurricane watch issued from north of Port Mansfield to San Luis Pass; storm surge watch in effect from Port Mansfield to High Island. By 11 p.m. Harvey strengthens to tropical storm. Gov. Gregg Abbott preemptively declares state of disaster for 30 Texas counties.
Thursday, Aug. 24
9:30 a.m.: Nueces County, Corpus Christi and Port Aransas issue mandatory evacuation of road-ready, high-profile RVs from Padre Island, Mustang Island and North Beach no later than 6 p.m.
11 a.m.: Port Aransas Mayor Charles R. Bujan orders mandatory evacuation.
Noon: Harvey strengthens to Category 1 hurricane with 80 mph winds. NHC begins predicting a major hurricane — Category 3 or higher. San Patricio County and Aransas County issue mandatory evacuation orders for residents.
3:30 p.m.: Nueces County Judge Loyd Neal and Corpus Christi Mayor Joe McComb urge low-lying areas including Padre Island, Flour Bluff and North Beach to evacuate voluntarily. All Nueces County beaches closed. RTA begins voluntary evacuation of residents by bus.
6 p.m.: Residents in western Nueces County, including Bishop, Agua Dulce, Banquete, Driscoll, Petronila and Robstown, advised to voluntarily evacuate.
Buy Photo
A hurricane warning sign on South Padre Island Drive in Corpus Christi ahead of Hurricane Harvey on Tuesday, Aug. 24, 2017.
 (Photo: Courtney Sacco/Caller-Times)
Friday, Aug. 25
Midnight: Harvey strengthens to Category 2. Maximum sustained winds estimated at 100 mph.
6 a.m.: Harvey’s winds increase to 110 mph. Southwest’s 6:30 a.m. flight last one to leave Corpus Christi International Airport before all flights canceled.
8 a.m.: Weather conditions on coast begin to deteriorate. Corpus Christi Naval Air Station measures 31 mph sustained winds with 39 mph gusts. Port Aransas ferry ceases operation.
10 a.m.: Harvey approximately 115 miles southeast of Corpus Christi. Outer rainbands begin sweeping across lower and middle Texas coast. HEB closes all Corpus Christi, Refugio and Robstown stores.
11 a.m.: Bus evacuations of unincorporated areas of Nueces County end. Residents who remain are advised to shelter in place. NOAA tide gauges at Port Aransas begin recording 1 to 2 feet of storm surge inundation. NAS-CC records 48 mph wind gusts. Port Aransas records 39 mph wind gusts. Gov. Greg Abbott requests presidential disaster declaration.
Buy Photo
Residents stand in line outside the Corpus Christi Natatorium as they wait to board a bus to evacuate to San Antonio ahead of Hurricane Harvey on Tuesday, Aug. 24, 2017.
 (Photo: Courtney Sacco/Caller-Times)
2 p.m.: Harvey strengthens to Category 3 hurricane. Maximum sustained winds measuring near 120 mph. Power outages begin in Flour Bluff and area around JFK Memorial Causeway.
4:15 p.m.: EF-0 tornado touches down 3 miles east-northeast of Seadrift.
5 p.m.: Texas Coastal Ocean Observation Network station at Aransas Pass reports sustained winds of 67 mph and gusts to 81 mph. Harvey about 50 miles ESE of Corpus Christi. CCPD officers ordered to take shelter, cease answering emergency calls until intense weather passes.
6 p.m.: Harvey intensifies to Category 4. Maximum sustained winds at 130 mph. National Weather Service advises counties near eye to brace as if a tornado was approaching.
8 p.m.: Eyewall begins moving onshore. Aransas Pass station records 90 mph sustained winds, 108 mph gust. Flour Bluff station reports 81 mph sustained winds. FEMA grants Gov. Abbott’s request for disaster declaration.
— NWS Corpus Christi (@NWSCorpus) August 26, 2017
9 p.m.: Aransas Pass station records 102 mph sustained winds, 120 mph gust.
10 p.m.: Harvey makes landfall on San Jose Island, between Port Aransas and Port O’Connor. Aransas Pass station reports 111 mph sustained winds, 131 mph gust.
11 p.m.: Eye moves over Aransas Bay. Aransas Pass station reports 102 mph sustained winds, gusting to 132 mph. Station at Aransas Wildlife Refuge reports 75 mph sustained winds, gusts to 99 mph.
Saturday, Aug. 26
1 a.m.: Harvey makes second landfall on northeastern shore of Copano Bay. Harvey downgraded to Category 3 hurricane with winds 125 mph.
5 a.m.: Tide gauge at Port Lavaca measures 6.6 feet. Rain gauge at Victoria measures 24-hour precipitation total of 16.43 inches.
7:05 a.m.: Sunrise. AEP reports show 99,587 in Nueces County and 24,951 in San Patricio County without power.
1 p.m.: Harvey 45 miles WNW of Victoria, 60 miles ESE of San Antonio. Weakens to tropical storm. Movement slows. Gov. Abbott adds 20 Texas counties to disaster proclamation.
10 p.m.: Harvey 40 miles NW of Victoria, 75 miles east of San Antonio.
Sunday, Aug. 27
Harvey begins moving slowly southeast toward Houston area. Flooding emergencies throughout southeastern Texas coast. Gov. Abbott requests 12 additional counties be added to presidential disaster declaration; adds 4 additional counties to state disaster declaration.
Buy Photo
Aerial view of Hurricane Harvey damage in Port Aransas, TX. Harvey struck the Coastal Bend as a Category 4 hurricane on Friday, August 25, 2017.
 (Photo: Courtney Sacco and Matt Woolbright/Caller-Times)
Monday, Aug. 28
Harvey’s center moves into Gulf of Mexico with winds of 45 mph. Catastrophic flooding in southeastern Texas continues. Tropical storm and storm surge warnings extend to Louisiana. Gov. Abbott visits Coastal Bend and activates entire Texas National Guard; deployed guard members number 12,000.
Tuesday, Aug. 29
Rain, catastrophic flooding continues in southeastern Texas and extends into southwestern Louisiana. Harvey remains just offshore of middle and upper Texas coast. Gov. Abbott and President Donald Trump visit Corpus Christi, receive detailed briefing.
President Donald Trump, flanked by Texas Gov. Greg Abbott and first lady Melania Trump listens during a briefing on Harvey relief efforts, Tuesday, August 29, 2017, at a fire station in Corpus Christi, Texas. (AP Photo/Evan Vucci)
 (Photo: Evan Vucci, AP)
Wednesday, Aug. 30
Tropical storm Harvey makes third landfall, just west of Cameron, Louisiana. Continues through Southwestern and central Louisiana. Weakens to tropical depression. Beaumont and Port Arthur experiencing flash flood emergencies. Far eastern Texas and western Louisiana receiving flooding rains. Gov. Abbott requests 14 additional counties be added to presidential disaster declaration
Buy Photo
Betty Clark (left) talks with Vice President Mike Pence in Rockport, TX at the First Baptist Rockport on Thursday, August 31, 2017. Several secretaries of state and the Vice-President visited Rockport to reaffirm the federal government's promise of help for victims of Hurricane Harvey.
 (Photo: Rachel Denny Clow/Caller-Times)
Thursday, Aug. 31
National Hurricane Center ceases tracking Harvey's remnants. Gov. Abbott increases National Guard deployment to 24,000. Gov. Abbott and Vice President Mike Pence visit Rockport and Victoria, speak with residents and participate in recovery efforts.
Compiled by Allison Ehrlich, Caller-Times archivist
