Money for Hurricane Harvey victims raised by Hanover-Horton schools | 						MLive.com
Money for Hurricane Harvey victims raised by Hanover-Horton schools
Comment
Updated on September 16, 2017 at 12:02 PM
Posted on September 16, 2017 at 12:00 PM
Students in the Hanover-Horton School District raised more than $2,560 to help families in the Katy Independent School District recover from Hurricane Harvey. Here is a photo from middle school students on $1 hat day.
Students in the Hanover-Horton School District raised more than $2,560 to help families in the Katy Independent School District recover from Hurricane Harvey. Here is a photo from middle school students on $1 hat day.(
Courtesy Photo
asurma@mlive.com
HANOVER TWP., MI -  Hanover-Horton School District students may not have been directly affected by Hurricane Harvey, but that didn't stop them from doing their part to help those who were.
Harvey, a Category 4 hurricane, made landfall Aug. 25 and left a path of destruction in its wake in East Texas. Included in that path of devastation was the city of Katy, Texas.
Hanover-Horton students decided they wanted to help.
At the end of a week-long fundraiser from Sept. 5-13, the district had raised more than $2,560 to help families in the Katy Independent School District recover. 
"Time and time again, when there's a tragedy in our local area, our community comes together to help out," said John Denney, Hanover-Horton superintendent. "Now, our students reached out across the country to help out what we can. That's really special."
Students in the Hanover-Horton High School Community Service Club organized the fundraiser, Denney said.
The high school, middle school and elementary school each had a $1 hat day to start raising money.
"One little boy in the elementary wore six hats on hat day and paid for them all," said Jacquie Melling, Community Service Club adviser. "Whatever age or grade level they are, the students really realized the situation."
Other fundraising activities included a $1 donuts day at the high school and $1 games of lighting, "Hoops for Harvey," at the middle school.
Local businesses and groups such as Frosty King donated items for a raffle. Tickets cost $5.
Middle school principal Denise Bergstrom said she's simply proud of her students.
"The compassion they showed was amazing," she said. "It's very touching. This is something that happened thousands of miles away from us and they felt strongly enough to be moved to do something like this."
The district chose to donate to the Katy Independent School District after a former Hanover-Horton student who now teaches in Katy, Texas, Kala Smith Grzesek, reached out to Bergstrom.
Smith Grzesek's family is safe, Bergstrom said. But many families within the district have been greatly impacted, she said.
View Comments
