Cities Gear Up to Take In Storm Victims From Texas Coast - The New York Times
Cities Gear Up to Take In Storm Victims From Texas Coast
By THE NEW YORK TIMES
AUG. 28, 2017
Harvey Flood Rescues: ‘We Got About 100 People Out’
Texans with boats are patrolling neighborhoods around Houston and bringing residents stranded by flooding to safety.
By BARBARA MARCOLINI on Publish Date August 28, 2017. Photo by Tamir Kalifa for The New York Times. Watch in Times Video »
embed
The rains from Tropical Storm Harvey pounded the Houston region on Monday, stranding thousands of residents — many on rooftops — awaiting rescue. Floodwaters are expected to continue rising for days.
Many turned to social media to get help: “My sister needs help!!!” read one tweet, followed by an address. Officials scrambled to reach stranded people, urging boat owners to pitch in on an enormous and frantic rescue. And with nearly two feet of rain still expected, the authorities worried the worst was yet to come. Here’s the latest:
• With record floodwaters, more than 450,000 people are likely to seek federal aid, the Federal Emergency Management Agency said on Monday. The agency has estimated that about 30,000 people will seek emergency shelter, and that federal aid will be needed for years. Read more on the storm here .
• Some 100,000 customers in the Houston area are without power, Floyd LeBlanc of CenterPoint Energy said. Repair crews have had trouble getting through the floodwaters.
• On Monday, local officials said the death toll had risen to 10 from five.
“In Harris County, we have six deaths that are potentially flood related,” said Tricia Bentley, a spokeswoman for the Harris County Institute of Forensic Sciences, which serves as both a medical examiner’s office and crime lab. Officials also reported one death each in Rockport and La Marque, and two in Montgomery County.
• More than 30 inches of rain has fallen on parts of the Houston area since Thursday, the National Weather Service reported, causing catastrophic flooding that officials have called the worst in the state’s history.
• The White House announced that President Trump and the first lady, Melania Trump, would be visiting Texas on Tuesday. They will arrive in Corpus Christi in the morning for a briefing on relief efforts, and then head to Austin for a tour of the Emergency Operations Center and a briefing with state leaders.
• Harvey turned back out to sea on Monday, with the center of the storm reaching the Gulf of Mexico south of Houston, the National Hurricane Center reported. It was expected to move to the northeast, along the Gulf coast toward far eastern Texas and southwest Louisiana.
Video
Houston Flooding Is Deadly as Harvey Lingers
Harvey, now a tropical storm, pummeled Houston and the surrounding region, bringing catastrophic flooding and killing at least five people.
By CHRIS CIRILLO and DAPHNE RUSTOW on Publish Date August 27, 2017. Photo by David J. Phillip/Associated Press. Watch in Times Video »
• Times journalists chronicled the unfolding disaster: We’re sharing a collection of the most powerful photographs and a guide to our coverage . Alan Blinder and Sheri Fink looked at hospitals inundated by patients and water . And Jack Healy visited a San Antonio evacuation center where people were desperate for news from home.
• Follow Times correspondents tracking the storm on Twitter: @mannyNYT , @alanblinder , @julieturkewitz and @ckrausss in Houston, @jackhealyNYT and @ David_Philipps in San Antonio, and @jswatz in New Orleans. Some highlights are here . Some of their tweets are collected here . In comments, Times readers shared expressions of shock, sympathy and encouragement. Read them here .
• Are you in an affected area? If you are safe, and are able to, please share your photos and videos with us.
Map of Hurricane Harvey’s Path
SEVERITY Category 4 3 2 1 Tropical storm
Source: National Weather Service
The flooding could get worse in Houston.
The Army Corps of Engineers on Monday began releasing water from flood-control reservoirs, which is likely to worsen flooding in parts of Houston, Mayor Sylvester Turner said.
The Buffalo Bayou, the major waterway flowing west to east through the heart of the city, is already at record-high flood levels, and was projected to remain that way for days, even without the release from the Addicks and Barker reservoirs at the western edge of Houston.
“As they increase the water and it comes down, the water level along Buffalo Bayou, in all probability, it will increase,” Mr. Turner said at a news conference. People who were not in a crisis state yesterday may find themselves in a crisis state today,” he added.
With the reservoirs at capacity, the Army Corps began releasing water from them before dawn. Mr. Turner said the release was 5,000 cubic feet per second, and would increase to 8,000.
Video
Aerial Video of Aransas Pass, Tex.
Views of the flooding in Aransas Pass, a town about 20 miles northeast of Corpus Christi.
By ARANSAS PASS POLICE DEPARTMENT on Publish Date August 27, 2017. .
Evacuees and residents face a new reality.
Rescues of people stranded by floodwaters continued throughout southeastern Texas, and Gov. Greg Abbott said the state was sending hundreds more boats and high-clearance vehicles to the region to aid those efforts.
Governor Abbott activated the entire Texas National Guard , except those already deployed or preparing to deploy on other missions, to aid in storm rescue and recovery. He said the order will increase the number of troops involved to 12,000 from about 3,000.
The city of Dallas is opening a “mega-shelter” to house up to 5,000 evacuees from the battered Gulf Coast, and Mayor Mike Rawlings said on Monday the North Texas city has been asked to brace for “numbers that could be up in the tens of thousands.” In Fort Worth, 30 miles west of Dallas, Mayor Betsy Price said city officials are also preparing to activate shelters once the state requests assistance.
In San Antonio, empty warehouses were being readied as shelters for 4,100 evacuees.
Dallas officials said the city began making arrangements to convert its convention center into a giant shelter after a request from state officials. The city is already operating shelters at three local recreation centers, and Mayor Rawlings said city officials would consider other sites in Dallas and the surrounding county. — JULIE TURKEWITZ in Houston and DAVID MONTGOMERY in Austin.
Waterlogged and abandoned cars are everywhere.
The cars, it seemed, were everywhere, abandoned with few clues as to how their drivers had escaped or what became of those people afterward.
As Harvey continued to unleash itself on Houston, abandoned vehicles became eerie symbols of the storm’s destruction.
Photo
Hughton Murray checks on his vehicle that he was forced to abandon on Sunday morning as flood waters in Houston rose. Credit Tamir Kalifa for The New York Times
Cars sat half-smashed on the side of the road and alone in muddy fields. A red sedan was trapped in a road-turned-river in the Galleria area. A cluster of trucks and S.U.V.s were stuck in a highway-turned-lake on U.S. 59 East.
By one highway ramp, a black vehicle sat surrounded by water, stopped like a dead whale. On an opposite ramp, a semitrailer sat contorted, its front cab facing right in a turn that never fully happened. — JULIE TURKEWITZ in Houston
Trump on federal aid: ‘I think you’re going to be in fantastic shape.’
At a news conference with President Sauli Niinisto of Finland, President Trump said he had spoken with Governor Abbott. He said he expected to receive formal requests for federal aid “very soon,” and predicted that Congress would approve them “very, very quickly.”
Newsletter Sign Up
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
Sign Up
You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.
Thank you for subscribing.
An error has occurred. Please try again later.
You are already subscribed to this email.
