Hurricane Harvey recovery: Parts of Texas still in rescue and recovery mode - CNN
Harvey photographer: Victims were in disbelief 05:06
After the water, mildew and mold
Other residents have already emptied their once-flooded homes of all their contents, including the waterlogged drywall. The hope is to get in front of the mildew and mold already blooming and acrid in the humid Texas heat. Across the region, driveways, front lawns and curbs are covered with what was once inside homes. In Houston, the city has brought in large trucks and other equipment to begin clearing the streets of residential debris.
Debris from flooded homes is piled outside in Lakewood near the home of Daniela Alvarado and Leonardo Aguirre.
Daniela Alvarado and Leonardo Aguirre live in one of these hard-hit Houston areas. For them, the flooding was a family affair. Nine of their family members' homes are also in their Lakewood neighborhood in northeast Houston and all had some level of flooding. The damage to their home is much worse than they expected. Aguirre has lived here since 1991. He remembers Hurricane Allison in 2001 but says Harvey was much worse. Still, the couple and their two children plan to stay put.
"We are buying the house. I mean we are practically almost done paying it. We can't just go somewhere else and start all over. I mean there's something here, I think, to rebuild. So we are going to try again," Aguirre said. This, after the family just finished remodeling about 90% of their house within the last three months.
If another hurricane heads their way, the couple says they would make some different choices. "I think I would just try to evacuate because putting my kids at risk and all of the things that we had to do just to get out of here, I wouldn't want to go through that again. I mean it was a scary sight," Aguirre said.
Another threat: mosquitoes
Mosquitoes pose another threat, with all the standing water providing the perfect breeding ground for the bugs that can carry Zika or the West Nile virus. The Texas Department of State Health Services has begun aerial insecticide spraying in Refugio and Bee Counties near Corpus Christi. The state also is requesting further assistance from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
As needs are still being assessed, all five living former presidents have teamed up to raise money for Hurricane Harvey victims. Called the One America Appeal, the initiative features the cooperation of Jimmy Carter, George H.W. Bush, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush and Barack Obama. One America Appeal is also prepared to raise money to help Americans impacted by Hurricane Irma if needed.
CORRECTION: A previous version of this story contained the incorrect date on photos of the flooding in south Texas. The photos were taken Wednesday, September 6.
CNN's Traci Tamura and Amanda Watts contributed to this report
