PositiveID Successfully Detects Ebola Virus on its Firefly Dx Prototype System
Published on
August 8, 2017
DELRAY BEACH, Fla., Aug. 08, 2017 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) — PositiveID Corporation (OTCQB:PSID), a life sciences company focused on detection and diagnostics, and its ExcitePCR Corporation subsidiary announced today that it has successfully detected Ebola virus on the Firefly Dx breadboard pathogen detection system (“prototype system”) and published a white paper and data on PositiveID’s website and ExcitePCR’s website.
In a collaborated effort with assay partner GenArraytion Inc., ExcitePCR successfully detected Ebola virus on the Firefly Dx prototype system. Ebola virus was tested at low number of copies via polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and the amplification curves demonstrated a cycle threshold (Ct) of 21. The automated runs successfully synthesized cDNA using a proprietary reverse transcriptase (RT) step and then completed a 40-cycle PCR to produce the results.
Rapid detection and diagnosis of Ebola virus infection along with vaccination is imperative to quickly containing an epidemic. Ebola is an RNA virus and requires a RT step prior to PCR. Despite its potential diagnostic advantages, RT-PCR methodology (both conventional and real-time approaches) typically requires significant laboratory infrastructure, electrical power, multiple temperature-sensitive reagents, the operation and maintenance of specialized equipment, and technical expertise in molecular biology, potentially complicating deployment in resource-limited settings.
“At the height of the Ebola virus outbreak, there were multiple challenges with accurately diagnosing individuals due to the need to collect samples, take them back to a central lab, and then wait hours or even days for results,” stated Lyle L. Probst CEO and President of ExcitePCR. “Firefly Dx could eliminate those challenges as a self-contained, portable lab for point-of-care/point-of-need applications, providing results in 30 minutes.”
The recent outbreak of Ebola virus disease in West Africa has highlighted both the importance of rapid and accurate diagnosis of this disease and the challenges around diagnostic testing. Throughout the 2014-2015 outbreak, diagnosis relied primarily on testing of venipuncture blood samples from symptomatic individuals in a biocontainment laboratory facility, leading to challenges with specimen collection and data management and often a prolonged turnaround time to final results.
Continued Mr. Probst, “Ebola detection is a perfect example of an application where Firefly Dx could be particularly critical – in remote locations, far from lab facilities, where time to results can mean life or death.  This is why we have formed ExcitePCR; to facilitate getting the necessary strategic partner and direct funding in place to complete the development of what we believe is a very important product that can change the face of biological detection.”
In addition to Ebola virus, the Firefly Dx prototype system has also successfully detected a number of other pathogenic organisms including Zika, E. coli, influenza, MRSA, MSSA, C. diff and others.
About PositiveID Corporation
PositiveID Corporation is a life sciences tools and diagnostics company with an extensive patent portfolio. PositiveID develops biological detection and diagnostics systems, specializing in the development of microfluidic systems for the automated preparation of and performance of biological assays. PositiveID is also a leader in the mobile technology vehicle market, with a focus on the laboratory market and homeland security. For more information on PositiveID, please visit http://www.psidcorp.com , or connect with PositiveID on Twitter , Facebook or LinkedIn .
Statements about PositiveID’s future expectations, including the likelihood that Firefly Dx could eliminate those challenges as a self-contained, portable lab for point of care/point of need applications, providing results in 30 minutes; the likelihood that Ebola detection is a perfect example of an application where Firefly Dx could be particularly critical – in remote locations, far from lab facilities, where time to results can mean life or death; the likelihood why this is why PositiveID has formed ExcitePCR, to facilitate getting the necessary strategic partner and direct funding in place to complete the development of what it believes is a very important product that can change the face of biological detection; constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and as that term is defined in the Private Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties and are subject to change at any time, and PositiveID’s actual results could differ materially from expected results. These risks and uncertainties include, without limitation, the Company’s ability to complete the development and testing of Firefly Dx; the Company’s ability to raise capital; the Company’s ability to commercialize Firefly Dx; as well as other risks. Additional information about these and other factors that could affect the Company’s business is set forth in the Company’s various filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including those set forth in the Company’s 10-K filed on March 31, 2017, and 10-Qs filed on May 15, 2017, November 18, 2016, and August 12, 2016, under the caption “Risk Factors.” The Company undertakes no obligation to update or release any revisions to these forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this statement or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events, except as required by law.
CONTACT: Contacts: PositiveID Corporation Allison Tomek (561) 805-8044 atomek@psidcorp.com
