Print
All Ebola, all the time: That’s been the state of the press for a couple of weeks. The amount of ink spilled, or bytes used, on a national news story should be loosely proportionate to its impact on readers, but we all know that’s not how it really works. No media outlet—this one included—has managed to restrain itself in reporting the facts without trumping up the overall story of the virulent disease.
The irony, at least for Americans, is that only two people have become infected on U.S. soil, and only one of all those treated here has died, while the list of Americans affected by other (more mundane) major health threats is much longer. The press, however, has turned Ebola coverage into a self-perpetuating frenzy. The media keeps making waves and then surfs them in every direction. No question there’s an overwrought panic over Ebola in the United States, and no question the media has played a major role in generating that panic.
Story Continued Below
So many problems have plagued the coverage of Ebola that it’s difficult to know where to start. It’s not just the Ebolamania of publishing story after story after story. It is also the reliance on “ experts ” who actually aren’t , eschewing basic principles about reporting on science and risk to human life, using imprecise terminology , exhorting the public not to panic while serving up panic-inducing coverage and neglecting to consider the harms such coverage could cause.
Certainly the media ramped up coverage when the health issue of the moment was the H1N1 influenza or SARS, but there has been something much more urgent, consuming and sensational about Ebola that I attribute to several factors: It sounds exotic (named after a river rather than called by an acronym); it has a much higher fatality rate than other health scares (even though much of this is due to under-resourced health care in West Africa); it comes from Africa (where life is unfortunately and inaccurately often portrayed as more dire and desperate than on other continents); and, perhaps most importantly, the virus had already infected our imaginations due to Richard Preston’s (scientifically problematic but nonetheless popular) 1994 book The Hot Zone and a film that came out the following year,  Outbreak. Flip on Netflix to watch Dustin Hoffman, Rene Russo and Morgan Freeman in that 1995 flick, and you’ll hear nearly every misconception and concern being bandied about in the news and on social media today.
In many cases, the Ebola stories and headlines have played up the risk of transmission—much as that film and book did—but never bother with the context that would help readers put that risk into perspective. One Foreign Policy headline in August irresponsibly declared “You Are Not Nearly Scared Enough About Ebola” even though the article primarily deals with the African outbreak. Expert commentary in the New York Times and infectious disease news services stoked fears that Ebola could become airborne, even though such a possibility is “very unlikely,” according to Kent State University infectious disease specialist Tara C. Smith . “We’ve never seen a human virus change transmission routes in that manner,” she told me . (Ebola is transmitted only through direct contact to a person’s broken skin or mucous membranes with the bodily fluids of the infected patient, and even then, the patient is most infectious primarily when the symptoms are the worst.) Sometimes the coverage has just been plain silly: Photos of infected nurse Nina Pham’s dog playing with Dallas Animal Shelter employees in hazmat suits, for instance, and two male strippers in Texas announcing their willingness to self-quarantine.
It’s not that the media should not report on all the facts of the disease’s spread and the missteps that American public health officials have made in dealing with it. But overplaying the blame game without emphasizing that these missteps do not actually put readers at risk neglects to answer the key question any reader will want to know: “Am I in danger?”
In fact, it’s the fear-festering itself that presents the real health risk. The stress induced by panic can lead to increased blood pressure, increased risk of cardiovascular problems, greater severity of clinical depression and interference with concentration, digestion and the endocrine system, according to the Mayo Clinic and the American Institute of Stress. Ironically, stress also depresses the immune system —thereby making individuals more susceptible to infectious diseases they are far more likely to encounter, such as influenza .
And then there are the social and economic costs. “Widespread public worry cuts into worker productivity and consumer spending, increases health care costs, disrupts education, leads to cancellations of a wide range of professional and public events and changes how people interact with each other, including the stigmatization of people from West Africa,” says David Ropeik , a risk communication consultant and author of How Risky Is It, Really? Why Our Fears Don’t Always Match the Facts .
Indeed, we’ve seen most of these occur: Airline stocks have dropped ; a woman who vomited on a flight was locked in the bathroom ; schools in two states have unnecessarily closed ; a teacher who simply traveled to Dallas for a conference has been placed on leave for three weeks; students are being inappropriately barred from school ; a cruise ship of 4,000 people was not allowed to dock at a major tourist destination in Mexico; campus visits and speeches have been cancelled; and a woman who simply vomited on a tour bus “forced the temporary quarantine of military members going to a Marine Corps ceremony in Washington.” (The “Ebolanoia” has become so great that infectious disease journalist Maryn McKenna has begun tracking stories of overreaction on her Tumblr .)
