BLACK FRIDAY AND CYBER MONDAY SALE: 25% OFF on All eBooks Combo packs! GRAB NOW
10 Resources For Seafarers To Know Everything About The Deadly Ebola Virus Disease
By Raunek | In: Marine Safety | Last Updated on
October 7, 2017
+11
According to the recent statistics provided by the World Health Organisation (WHO), more than 6500 people have lost their lives until now to the fatal Ebola virus out of 18000 plus cases.
The shipping world understands the dangerous of the deadly epidemic virus and has therefore taken all necessary steps to ensure the safety of the crews visiting the affected countries.
The International Maritime Organisation (IMO) has also issued guidance and information on protection measures for ships visiting port in countries in West Africa affected by the Ebola virus disease (EVD).
Considering the seriousness of the disease and the risks it poses to the seafarers, we have compiled a list of useful resource for understanding the threats and the precautions to be taken while visiting these affected areas.
Image Credits: Dennis Montilla / Checking temperature of stevedores at Freetown, Sierra Leone
1. IMO Ebola Virus Resource Page
The IMO Ebola virus information page offers the ultimate resource for seafarers to know more about the disease and keep themselves updated with all latest information on the same. Make sure you download and read the related documents providing details on full and effective implementation of maritime security measures to assist in preventing the spread of Ebola virus, information on types of personal protective equipment to use etc.
Visit the IMO Ebola Page here .
2. WHO Ebola Website
If you want to have a greater picture on Ebola (And we think you should) with the latest statistics, steps taken around the world to fight the disease, latest updates and news, FAQs and other crucial facts then WHO’s Ebola website is the best resource.
Ebola Virus Disease FAQs
3. Ebola- Staying Safe : Free Training Movie For Seafarers By Videotel 
This important video provides timely reminder of the dangers of Ebola, and how it could affect ships scheduled to visit affected ports.
The video explains what Ebola is, what its symptoms are and how the virus spreads. It outlines the ways in which crew members can protect themselves and also what steps Masters, ship owners and managers can do to help keep crew members safe from harm.
Watch the video:
You can download their free training here .
4. Infographic On Practical Advice For Seafarers By IMO and WHO
IMO in collaboration with WHO has made an important infographic for seafarers on simple instructions to follow with regards to Ebola. You can download the poster and use it on vessels to create awareness among seafarers. Download here.
Image Credits: imo.org
5. Video – Ebola: What business travellers need to know By SOS International
International SOS, the world’s leading medical and travel security services company, has created an excellent resource for gathering knowledge on Ebola Virus. Together with the International Organisation of Employers (IOE), SOS has  produced a video for business travellers with practical information regarding Ebola.
SOS international also has an excellent page and a Mobile Application on Ebola. Both can be accessed here .
6. Ebola Information Page by The International Chamber of Shipping
The International Chamber of Shipping also maintains a page with the latest information on Ebola Virus Disease. ICS has also produced a ports action database recording all reports and information received on Ebola. Visit the page here .
ICS with IMEC (International Maritime Employers’ Council) and the ITF (International Transport Workers’ Federation) has issued guidance for seafarers on risks posed to ship’s crews college in countries affected by the Ebola virus. The guidance document can be viewed here .
7. Picture Guide And Other Resources on Ebola By SKULD
SKULD has made an excellent visual guide to Ebola Precautions on ships, providing information on procedures of preparing the ship for visitors (on shore side and vessel side), preparing the crew, preparing for disposal, post-port call cleaning etc. The visual guide can be accessed here .
Some other Ebola guides by SKULD:
