Photo By: Jackie Garces
Description
Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) is a highly contagious infection caused by one of five virus species belonging to the Filoviridae family believed to be carried by fruit bats. The Zaïre, Sudan, Taï Forest, and Bundibugyo viruses cause illness in humans while the Reston species affects animals.
It is still unclear how the virus originated or how it lives in the natural environment, but it is believed to be a zoonosis (an animal disease that can spread to humans) primarily found in primates. If a person comes into close contact with an infected gorilla, chimpanzee, or monkey, they can spread the infection to other humans. Person to person transmission occurs when coming into contact with the blood and bodily secretions of infected persons or cadavers without proper infection control gear (like masks, gloves, and gowns), and coming in direct contact with unsterilized medical instruments, infected blood products, and organs. So far, scientists have not been able to prove that the infection spreads among humans through air particles by sneezing or coughing.
Risk
Ebola Virus Disease typically occurs in west and central Africa. Persons working in healthcare settings are at greater risk, especially if working in unhygienic conditions and adequate protective equipment is not available. 
Symptoms
Usually symptoms appear between 2 to 21 days and include sudden fever, muscle pain, headache, sore throat, red eyes, and intense weakness. The illness progresses to vomiting, diarrhea, skin rashes, liver and kidney malfunction, as well as internal and external bleeding. Laboratory testing reveals low white blood cell and platelet counts as well as elevated liver enzymes. Treatment includes oral rehydration or intravenous fluids to offset dehydration and supportive care of symptoms. Ebola Virus Disease can be misdiagnosed with hemorrhagic illnesses such as Marburg Virus Disease or Lassa Fever , and initial symptoms can be misdiagnosed as Malaria or Typhoid Fever .
Prevention
Travellers going to affected areas should refrain from visiting households or healthcare settings that have been affected by an Ebola outbreak. Those who care for patients with suspected or confirmed Ebola cases should wear protective gowns, gloves, masks, as well as a face shield. 
Avoid eating meat from primates and monkeys.
Do not touch dead animals. 
Wash your hands thoroughly and frequently with soap and water. If not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer. Practice good body hygiene.
Ebola Virus Disease images, life cycle, and distribution maps
Health risk description last reviewed: June 15, 2016
Country information last updated: July 05, 2017
Sources
Hartman AL. Ebola and Marburg Virus Infections. In: McGill, A; Ryan, E; Hill, D; Solomon, T, eds. Hunter's Tropical Medicine and Emerging Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. New York: Saunders Elsevier; 2013: 331-333.
Peters CJ, Zaki SR. Overview of Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers. In: Guerrant, R; Walker D; Weller P, eds. Tropical Infectious Diseases. 3rd ed. New York: Saunders Elsevier; 2011: 441-448.
Wertheim, Heiman; Horby, Peter; Woodall, John, eds. Atlas of Human Infectious Diseases. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012. 273 p.
