Opt out or contact us anytime
Both Caliber and the Kentucky facility sprang from a project sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, which was looking for a way to quickly produce vaccines or therapeutic proteins in the event of an emergency like a flu pandemic.
Now these facilities are likely to get their first big test.
“It’s not been tested, live-fire,” the federal official said. “And now we’re doing it.”
The system involves infecting tobacco with a genetically engineered virus that contains the instructions to make the antibody.
“Every time the virus tries to replicate, it spins out a copy of a monoclonal antibody,” said Charles J. Arntzen , a professor at Arizona State University who has long worked on such systems. The leaves are ground up to extract the antibody.
The federal official said that Caliber and other facilities that will be brought on line could produce 40 to 100 treatment courses per month.
Advertisement
Continue reading the main story
But Dr. Giroir of Texas A&M and a biotechnology industry executive familiar with Caliber said Caliber could potentially produce hundreds of treatment courses a month.
Researchers say the dose used in the monkey experiments, which was also used to treat the patients in Africa, is probably more than needed. If monkey testing can confirm that a lower dose is sufficient, then many more human treatment courses can be made.
There are also efforts underway to increase the amount of protein produced by each plant. Mapp is said to be working with another small company, Novici Biotech, which has a method of tweaking the genetic instructions for the antibodies in a way that could boost production.
More Ebola Coverage
Monoclonal antibodies used for drugs — like Herceptin and Avastin for cancer, and Humira and Remicade for rheumatoid arthritis — are typically produced in genetically engineered Chinese hamster ovary cells, or CHO cells, which are grown in giant stainless steel vats.
While production in tobacco is said to be faster and cheaper to get started, there is only limited tobacco capacity, while there is a huge capacity in the biotechnology industry to produce antibodies in CHO cells.
The Gates Foundation and the Wellcome Trust, as well as federal officials, are helping to scout some of this capacity for ZMapp production. However, it would take months to genetically engineer CHO cells to produce the antibodies and to scale up production. Meaningful production would not come until next year.
And officials say new monkey testing might be needed to show the antibodies produced in CHO cells are as effective as those produced in tobacco. At least one earlier study suggested this was not the case.
Federal officials said some of the early doses of ZMapp will be tested for safety in healthy volunteers. That is controversial because it means the scarce drug would be diverted from patients in Africa.
Dr. Jeremy Farrar , director of the Wellcome Trust, said it was necessary to establish basic safety, particularly in light of mistrust of Western medicine by some people in the outbreak area. “The reality is,” he added, that such safety testing “will happen quicker in the U.S. or the U.K.” But the Wellcome Trust has given a grant of about $5.2 million to a consortium that will move quickly to test ZMapp and other drugs in sick patients in Africa.
A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2014, on Page A16 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. to Increase Production of Drug to Treat Ebola, but May Not Meet Demand. Order Reprints | Today's Paper | Subscribe
