by Deimorz [A] x3
"Who would downvote this?" It's a common comment on reddit, and is fairly often followed up by someone explaining that reddit "fuzzes" the votes on everything by adding fake votes to posts in order to make it more difficult for bots to determine if their votes are having any effect or not. While it's always been a necessary part of our anti-cheating measures, there have also been a lot of negative effects of making the specific up/down counts visible, so we've decided to remove them from public view.
The "false negativity" effect from fake downvotes is especially exaggerated on very popular posts. It's been observed by quite a few people that every post near the top of the frontpage or /r/all seems to drift towards showing "55% like it" due to the vote-fuzzing, which gives the false impression of reddit being an extremely negative site. As part of hiding the specific up/down numbers, we've also decided to start showing much more accurate percentages here, and at the time of me writing this, the top post on the front page has gone from showing "57% like it" to "96% like it", which is much closer to reality.
(Edit: since people seem confused, the "% like it" is only on submissions, as it always has been.)
As one other change to go along with this, /u/umbrae recently rolled out a much improved version of the "controversial" sorting method. You should see the new algorithm in effect in threads and sorts within the past week. Older sorts (like "all time") may be out of date while we work to update old data. Many of you are probably accustomed to ignoring that sorting method since the previous version was almost completely useless, but please give the new version another shot. It's available for use with submissions as a tab (next to "new", "hot", "top"), and in the "sorted by" dropdown on comments pages as well.
This change may also have some unexpected side-effects on third-party extensions/apps/etc. that display or otherwise use the specific up/down numbers. We've tried to take various precautions to make the transition smoother, but please let us know if you notice anything going horribly wrong due to it.
I realize that this probably feels like a very major change to the site to many of you, but since the data was actually misleading (or outright false in many cases), the usefulness of being able to see it was actually mostly an illusion. Please give it a chance for a few days and see if things "feel" better without being able to see the specific up/down counts.
