Why not ban travel to stop Ebola?
Updated: October 24, 2014 — 6:30 AM EDT
Getty Images
NEW YORK, NY - OCTOBER 11: People arrive at the international arrivals terminal at New York's John F. Kennedy Airport (JFK ) airport on October 11, 2014 in New York City. Ebola screenings began on Saturday at JFK for travelers arriving from West African countries that have been afftected by the disease. (Photo by Spencer Platt/Getty Images)
@PublicsHealth
Ebola is rightly frightening people worldwide because of its graphic symptoms , high mortality rates, and perceived infectivity . Over the past few weeks, as we watched one man in Dallas die from Ebola and two of his health providers battle it–with another, unrelated case identified Thursday night in New York City –many Americans have wondered what the country can do to keep the disease out of the United States.
For some, like Rep. Tim Murphy (R., Pa.), the answer seems obvious: “ An immediate ban on non-essential commercial travel from Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone .” Murphy is not alone: on Oct. 8, a group of 27 lawmakers , including three Democrats, called on the Obama administration to halt flights from the affected countries. These numbers have grown in recent days , and even politicians who formerly opposed an Ebola travel ban–among them Texas Gov. Rick Perry and Sen. Kay Hagan (D., N.C.)–have now reversed themselves in the face of public and political pressure. Others, such as celebrity businessman Donald Trump, have used quite colorful language to demand the immediate imposition of similar proposals.
While this solution may seem like common sense, leading public health and infectious disease professionals think travel bans are a bad idea . Why? There are several reasons:
Contact tracing. One of the key ways that public health workers fight infectious diseases, including Ebola, is to trace all the people with whom an infected person comes in contact and observe them–even isolate them–until the period of infectivity passes. Travel bans restrict movement, however, so the bans often tempt people to find alternate routes. The risk here is that if infected people develop symptoms–and are, therefore, contagious–the travel ban may push them outside our surveillance system at precisely the time when we would want to find them, provide them care, and reduce their ability to infect others. “Right now we know who’s coming in,” Tom Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, explained at a recent congressional hearing . “If we try to eliminate travel … we won’t be able to check them for fever when they leave, we won’t be able to check them for fever when they arrive, we won’t be able—as we do currently—to see a detailed history to see if they’ve been exposed.”
Little or delayed effect. The primary public health objective for screening incoming travelers is to reduce or eliminate the likelihood of Ebola entering and spreading within a country. The curtailment of rights associated with such bans are, according to the Siracusa International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, legitimate only if they are specifically preventing disease. HIV-related travel bans did little to curtail the epidemic: Whereas a 1985 global survey of AIDS legislation found no “immigration and travel restrictions for people with the HIV virus,” by 1988 the World Health Organization found that at least 24 countries had introduced travel restrictions . As the folks over at Vox Media noted , however, it was clear as early as 1989 that these restrictions didn’t work. (A ban nevertheless remained in effect in the U.S. until four years ago.) More recent evidence, on SARS, shows even screening may have a similar lack of effect , while one research study concluded that “targeting intervention measures at the group with the highest risk of infection per individual”– ypically not the international travelers – “will achieve the largest reduction” in transmission. A recent computer model on the impact of travel bans on Ebola indicates that they would delay the spread by just a few weeks while doing little to affect Ebola's overall spread or infection rate .
Rebound effect. One of the problems with travel bans is that, to be effective, they must at least be complete. This means not just commercial airline travel, but shutting down all forms of air, sea, and land travel, even shipping or courier air-travel. This would function as a defacto economic embargo, which risks harming already weakened economies. “If you try to shut down air travel and sea travel, you risk affecting to a huge extent the economy, people’s livelihoods and their ability to get around without stopping the virus from traveling,” Gregory Hartl, a WHO spokesman, told reporters in August . “You can’t ship goods in. Sometimes these goods are basic staples people need to survive—food and fuel.” This, in turn, creates or accelerates a potential refugee crisis that may send nationals in those countries to refugee camps in the area , threatening the spread of the disease throughout the region and ultimately increasing the threat to the United States through a magnified epidemic.
Harmed medical response. The ultimate reason not to ban travel from affected countries is that it will likely worsen the epidemic in those countries while weakening the ability to respond to the problem. “Any discontinuation of transport will affect humanitarian aid, doctors, nurses and human resources entering the country, the transfer of biological sampling and equipment for hospitals," Daniel Menucci, a representative for the WHO's Travel and Transport Task Force, told reporters over the summer . “Anything you do to restrict movement of [volunteers] back and forth or keeping them from getting back to work, it could have an impact on the flow of people willing to serve overseas," noted George Salloum, who leads Ebola crisis response team for SIM , an evangelical international mission fighting Ebola in West Africa.
Despite what some media personalities suggest, government and public health officials want to protect Americans from Ebola, and they should move aggressively to confront the disease. They should do so, however, in ways that effectively contain the virus rather than through powerless public policies and destructive actions. So it makes sense that the CDC has adopted a balanced approach to containing Ebola, with travelers screened upon exiting the affected counties and then re-screened in an enhanced way and tracked after they arrive at American ports of entry. Hopefully we can draw on our collective memory of fighting other diseases to adopt compassionate, courageous, and effective responses to this global health challenge.
Read more about The Public's Health .
Published:
October 24, 2014 — 6:30 AM EDT
More in health
