Newsletter
Ebola Virus and Disease
Medically reviewed by Steven Kim, MD on June 30, 2015 — Written by Rachel Nall, RN, BSN and Kristeen Cherney
Outlook
What Is Ebola?
Ebola is a serious and deadly virus transmitted by animals and humans. It was initially detected in 1976 in Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo. Researchers named the disease after the Ebola River. Until recently, Ebola appeared in Africa only.
Although the Ebola virus has been present for more than 35 years, the largest outbreak began in West Africa in March 2014. This outbreak has proven more deadly, severe, and widespread than previous outbreaks. While cases have significantly declined since the peak of the outbreak, there’s still a chance of further outbreaks. Learning the facts about the virus can help prevent the spread of this deadly infection.
Causes
What Causes Ebola?
The Ebola virus belongs to the viral family Filoviridae. Scientists also call it Filovirus. These virus types cause hemorrhagic fever or profuse bleeding inside and outside the body. It’s accompanied by a very high fever. Ebola can be further divided into subtypes that are named for the location where they were identified. These include:
Bundibugyo
Taï Forest (previously known as Ivory Coast)
Zaire
The Ebola virus likely originated in African fruit bats. The virus is known as a zoonotic virus because it’s transmitted to humans from animals. Humans can also transfer the virus to each other. The following animals can transmit the virus:
chimpanzees
monkeys
porcupines
Since people may handle these infected animals, the virus can be transmitted via the animal’s blood and body fluids.
Risk Factors and Transmission
Risk Factors and Transmission
Unlike other types of viruses, Ebola can’t be transmitted through the air or by touch alone. You must have direct contact with the bodily fluids of someone who has it. The virus may be transmitted through:
blood
urine
vomit
These bodily fluids can all carry the Ebola virus. Transmission can occur via the eyes, nose, mouth, broken skin, or sexual contact. Healthcare workers are especially at risk for contracting Ebola because they often deal with blood and bodily fluids.
Other risk factors include:
exposure to infected objects, such as needles
interactions with infected animals
attending burial ceremonies of someone who has died from Ebola
traveling to areas where a recent outbreak has occurred
Symptoms
What Are the Symptoms of Ebola?
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Ebola symptoms typically appear within 8 to 10 days after exposure; however, symptoms can appear as early as two days after exposure or take as long as three weeks to appear.
Extreme fatigue is often the first and most prominent symptom. Other symptoms include:
diarrhea
unexplained bleeding or bruising
vomiting
If you’ve come in contact with or provided care to someone diagnosed with Ebola or handled infected animals and have any symptoms you should seek immediate medical attention.
How Is Ebola Diagnosed?
The early symptoms of Ebola can closely mimic other diseases like the flu, malaria, and typhoid fever.
Blood tests can identify antibodies of the Ebola virus. These may also reveal:
either unusually low or high white blood cell counts
low platelet counts
elevated liver enzymes
abnormal coagulation factor levels
In addition to blood tests, a doctor will also consider whether others in the patient’s community could be at risk.
Since Ebola may occur within three weeks of exposure, anyone with possible exposure might undergo an incubation period of the same timeframe. If no symptoms appear within 21 days, Ebola is ruled out.
Treatment
How Is Ebola Treated?
The Ebola virus does not have a cure or vaccine at this time. Instead, measures are taken to keep the person as comfortable as possible. Supportive care measures may include:
giving medications to maintain blood pressure
managing electrolyte balances
providing extra oxygen, if needed
providing intravenous and/or oral fluids to prevent dehydration
treating coexisting infections
preventing other infections from occurring
administering blood products if indicated
