Performance Ranking of Scientific Papers for World Universities
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article relies too much on references to primary sources . Please improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources .
(September 2010)
( Learn how and when to remove this template message )
The Performance Ranking of Scientific Papers for World Universities was a ranking system of 500 world universities by scientific paper volume, impact, and performance output. The ranking was published by the Higher Education Evaluation and Accreditation Council of Taiwan (HEEACT) [1] The project employed bibliometric methods to analyze and rank the scientific paper performance. In addition to the overall ranking, HEEACT publisheda list of the top 300 universities by six fields and ten subjects of science and technology . [2]
The rankings were introduced in 2007. The original ranking methodology favored toward universities with medical schools . In 2008, HEEACT began publishing a "Field Based Ranking" including six fields: agriculture and environmental sciences (AGE), clinical medicine (MED), engineering , computing , and technology (ENG), life sciences (LIFE), natural sciences (SCI), and social sciences (SOC). [3]
In 2010, HEEACT began publishing subject rankings in fields of various field of science and technology. Science fields are divided into physics , chemistry , mathematics , and geosciences . Technology fields are split up into electrical engineering , computer science , mechanical engineering , chemical engineering (including energy and fuels ), materials science , and civil engineering (including environmental engineering ).
HEEACT ended the Performance Ranking of Scientific Papers for World Universities Project in 2012. Due to disagreement about ranking results, the Taiwanese education authorities announced that the government would no longer support the Higher Education Evaluation and Accreditation Council of Taiwan to do this ranking. [4]
The Performance Ranking of Scientific Papers for World Universities has been published by the National Taiwan University since 2012, and the ranking is also known as the NTU Ranking. [5]
Contents
