Ebola Virus Disease (Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever) Topic Guide
What Is the History of Ebola Virus Disease?
The first Ebola virus species was discovered in 1976 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire) near the Ebola River, where it received its name. The first outbreak of Ebola virus disease infected 318 people and caused 280 deaths, with a mortality rate of 88%. A simultaneous outbreak occurred in Sudan and caused a mortality rate of 53%. Since then, sporadic outbreaks have occurred in Central and West Africa, with no cases reported between 1979 and 1994. In 1989, an Ebola virus strain, called Ebola-Reston, was introduced into Reston, Virginia, by infected monkeys imported from the Philippines. Fortunately, research workers who were exposed to the Ebola virus never developed symptoms of Ebola virus disease.
The latest and ongoing Ebola virus disease outbreak in West Africa was first reported in March 2014. It is considered the worst outbreak in Ebola virus history with a rising death toll in Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Nigeria. There was concern that the large number of infected people in this epidemic would cause a pandemic (spread of the disease worldwide) because infected people transmitted the disease for the first time to several African countries, Europe, and the United States (Texas). Fortunately, the disease was eventually contained and the pandemic was avoided. As of 2015 (most recent statistical data from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC]), there were almost 27,000 cases with over 11,000 deaths reported. Previous outbreaks had fewer than 500 cases per year according to CDC statistics.
What Are Ebola Virus Disease Causes and Risk Factors?
Ebola virus disease is caused by an infection with the Ebola virus, a member of the Filoviridae family. The Ebola virus has been found in African monkeys, chimpanzees, and other nonhuman primates. The natural reservoir (normal habitat) of Ebola viruses is unknown. However, researchers believe that the virus is zoonotic (animal-borne) with bats being the most likely reservoir.
There are five identified species (types) of Ebola virus. Four of the five have caused disease in humans:
Zaire ebolavirus
