Opt out or contact us anytime
The original Zaire species of ebolavirus was the first recognized back in 1976, when it emerged at a place called Yambuku in the northern boondocks of what then was Zaire, now the Democratic Republic of Congo. Of the 318 people infected, 280 (88 percent) died. A later outbreak in northeastern
Gabon
, in 1996, began with a chimpanzee carcass, scavenged from the forest by a group of boys on a hunting foray and devoured communally back at their village. (Chimps cannot be the reservoir host of Ebola because they too die from it, as this one evidently had.) Thirty-one human cases, 21 deaths. The Zaire virus has also struck three times in the Republic of Congo just across the river, killing dozens of people each time.
In all, since 1976, more than two dozen outbreaks of the various ebolaviruses have accounted for just over 1,640 reported deaths. So it’s a terrible thing, Ebola virus disease, but relatively rare.
The worst of these viruses (notably the Zaire species) burn hot in human populations, then succumb to control and disappear back into the forest for years at a time. Their invisible immanence makes them all the more dangerous during those lulls between outbreaks, and for that reason ecological research — efforts to find the reservoir hosts, and to learn how host-to-human spillovers occur — is vitally important.
People around the world have read such horrific tales about Ebola that they tend to dread it inordinately, sometimes with dark fascination, as though it’s a preternatural killer. It is not. It’s a horrible virus if you catch it, but it’s not easy to catch.
It afflicts poor African people who live in villages amid forest and are obliged by scarcity of options to eat bats, apes and other wild creatures, found dead or captured live.
Ebola in Guinea is not the Next Big One, an incipient pandemic destined to circle the world, as some anxious observers might imagine. It’s a very grim and local misery, visited upon a small group of unfortunate West Africans,  toward whom we should bow in sympathy and continue sending help.  It’s not about our fears and dreads.  It’s about them.
Advertisement
Continue reading the main story
David Quammen is the author of “Spillover: Animal Infections and the Next Human Pandemic.”
A version of this op-ed appears in print on April 10, 2014, on Page A25 of the New York edition with the headline: Ebola Is Not the Next Pandemic. Today's Paper | Subscribe
