N
Y
If your company holds the primary registration, provide the most recent EPA stamped “accepted” label. A label notification is not sufficient. This may mean that the most current stamped “accepted” label has a subsequent notification. That is fine. EPA needs the stamped “accepted” label. If your company holds only a distributor/supplemental label, provide a copy of the current distributor/supplemental label.
The following language needs to be highlighted in the text of the label
“Disinfectant”, “disinfects”, or any other form of the word “disinfect”,
At least one non-envelope virus (e.g. norovirus, rotavirus, adenovirus, poliovirus),
Hospital/health care facilities use site or the equivalent microbial pathogen claims, and
Any other use sites identified on the label per the template above.
In addition to meeting the criteria in the CDC Guidance, a registered product must also be recently registered or satisfy the Antimicrobial Testing Program (ATP) in order for the product to be included in List L.
If a registered product is on the ATP list and appears in either the “Agency Taking Action” column or the “No Post-Market Testing By EPA” column and was not registered recently, it will not appear on List L. See the ATP list to confirm a product's status .
If a product appears in the “No Post-Market Testing By EPA” column and a registrant wants to pursue having the product moved to the “Agency Confirmed Efficacy” column, please refer to the  Antimicrobial Testing Program .
Email the spreadsheet and label(s) to  disinfectantslist@epa.gov .
Additional Information
More information about EPA-registered disinfectants and other lists . 
If you hold the primary registration for a product that you believe should be added to this list please email  disinfectantslist@epa.gov .  In the subject line of your email include: “Include Product(s) on List [Insert list Identifier]; [Registration #(s)].”  In the body, identify the Company Name, Registration Number(s), and primary brand name(s) of the product(s). Your Request will be reviewed and the list will be corrected.
Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.
Pesticide Registration
