Zika podcast series: Evidence in action
August 2017 - WHO Zika podcast series, called Evidence in action, focuses on Zika virus infection and the people who are working on the disease and its outcomes. WHO’s experience over 2016 has shown that Zika virus and the associated neurological complications represent a long-term public health challenge. These episodes range from tracing the disease to the long term management of Zika virus syndrome.
WHO toolkit for the care and support of people affected by complications associated with Zika virus
WHO/PAHO
20 June 2017 -- This toolkit incorporates and builds upon the relevant guidelines and supportive documents developed in the past year from WHO and partners as part of the overall global response to Zika. The toolkit is designed to serve as a model guide, with the goal of enhancing country preparedness to Zika virus disease outbreaks.
New vector control response seen as a game-changer
Rapid unplanned urbanization, massive increases in international travel and trade, altered agricultural practices and other environmental changes are fuelling the spread of vectors worldwide, putting more and more people at risk. Malnourished people and those with weakened immunity are especially susceptible.
Zika: We must be ready for the long haul
WHO/PAHO
2 February 2017 - "We are now in the long haul and we are all in this together," said Dr Margaret Chan, Director-General of WHO. "WHO's strategic planning and commitment to work with partners for sustained interventions and research should go a long way towards bracing the world for this challenging – and still heart-breaking – effort."
Mapping social science research for Zika virus response
WHO
Social science research is an essential part of effective risk communication and community engagement for responding effectively to the ongoing Zika outbreak, as it is the case for any epidemic or pandemic. This interactive map allows you to gain an overview of such research to input into the response.
Knowledge Attitudes and Practice (KAP) surveys and other social science research allows responders to rapidly obtain valuable and insightful information in order to tailor interventions to better address people's needs at community level, thereby contributing to the overall public health response to Zika virus and its potential complications.
Zika virus disease
WHO/AMRO
Zika is a virus spread to humans by Aedes mosquitoes - the same mosquitoes that spread dengue, chikungunya and yellow fever. It usually causes mild illness, with most people sick with the virus getting a slight fever and skin rash. Others may also get conjunctivitis, muscle and joint pain, and feel tired. The symptoms usually finish in 2 to 7 days. The best protection from Zika virus is preventing mosquito bites.
