Opt out or contact us anytime
Last week, the C.D.C. issued a preliminary one-page summary of changes it recommended; they included waterproof head-to-toe garments and supervised removal of gear. Agency officials said they would announce the details soon — which they did Monday evening.
Advertisement
Continue reading the main story
Over this past weekend, as hospitals waited, Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases, appeared on several TV news shows to discuss the administration’s Ebola response, which included the appointment of an “Ebola czar.”
Dr. Fauci has been on television hundreds of times since the 1980s, when he became the face of the government’s response to the AIDS epidemic, and it appeared that the administration was tentatively using him as its top medical spokesman in Dr. Frieden’s place.
Graphic: A Cascade of Contacts From One Ebola Case in Dallas
Dr. Frieden has been heavily criticized in public and in Congress for saying that virtually any American hospital could handle an Ebola patient.
In fact, his answers to this question had been more nuanced, explaining that any hospital with a properly trained staff could treat patients without needing isolation rooms with negative pressure airlocks and other gear that make them resemble a space station more than a field hospital.
In answer to questions over the weekend from news anchors, Dr. Fauci said the C.D.C.′s old guidelines had been based on those issued by the World Health Organization and were meant for use “in the field, in the bush” rather than in a modern hospital.
In fact, W.H.O. guidelines are far more strict, although not quite as rigorous as those of Doctors Without Borders. The W.H.O. guidelines do mandate supervised gear removal, rubber aprons and boots, extra gloves and other steps.
In an interview on Monday, Dr. Fauci said that personal protective gear was not his specialty, and that he had been told by C.D.C. officials that their old guidelines were based on the W.H.O.′s.
Some critics claimed that his remark that W.H.O. guidelines were suitable “in the bush” implied that he felt African nurses needed less protection than American ones, because they were somehow expendable.
That was not remotely his intent, Dr. Fauci said. He said he meant that the desperate measures that advanced hospitals have tried on Ebola patients — such as dialysis, intubation, arterial puncture and rectal drainage tubes — can produce gushes of dangerous fluids while nurses are close and vulnerable.
Advertisement
Doctors Without Borders protocols do call for doing as few risky procedures as possible, including even drawing blood as seldom as is medically necessary.
More Ebola Coverage
A version of this article appears in print on October 21, 2014, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: C.D.C. Issues New Guidelines for Ebola Care. Order Reprints | Today's Paper | Subscribe
