Zika Virus Health Information Resource Guide
Disaster Lit® documents, PubMed articles, and many other resources are updated daily.
 
Keeping Current through
Content Syndication
Embed the content of this page on your own Web page to get automatic updates and new resources. More about Content Syndication .
 
History of Medicine Division, National Library of Medicine
Global Health Events Historical archive of Web documents on Ebola and Zika Virus.
Also available in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian, and  Spanish.
WHO Zika App
National Government (non-U.S.) Web Sites
Australian Government - Department of Health
Updates from U.S. States and Territories
Puerto Rico Departmento de Salud (in Spanish) New!
Pregnancy and Zika Virus
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Also available in Spanish, Portuguese, and French.
Pan American Health Organization, World Health Organization
Return to top
Free Resources from Publishers for Medical Responders
Leading global health bodies including academic journals, NGOs, research funders and institutes, have committed to sharing data and results relevant to the current Zika crisis and future public health emergencies as rapidly and openly as possible.
Free access is open until September 30, 2016
Oxford University Press
CDC Stacks: Public Health Publications
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Biomedical Journal Literature and Reports
From PubMed - Biomedical Journal Articles
Also available in French, Spanish, and Chinese.
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
Laboratory Detection and Diagnosis of Zika Virus
Pan American Health Organization, World Health Organization
This research home page has links on WHO Zika research and product pipelines for vaccines, diagnostics, and vector control.
World Health Organization
Includes materials in English and Portuguese.
Pan American Health Organization, World Health Organization
Surveillance and Control of Mosquito Vectors
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Also available in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish.
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
Twitter list for Zika Virus compiled by @NLM_DIMRC , the Twitter account from the Disaster Information Management Research Center, U.S. National Library of Medicine. The list includes selected Twitter accounts posting about the Zika Virus.
Facebook
HealthReach, U.S. National Library of Medicine.
Available in English, Spanish, Portuguese and other languages.
Search the Disaster Lit database for other multi-language resources on the Zika virus
Also available in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian, Spanish, and Portuguese.
World Health Organization
Also available in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish.
World Health Organization
Also available in Portuguese, French and Spanish.
Pan American Health Organization, World Health Organization
Also available in English, Portuguese, French, and Kreyòl ayisyen.
Hesperian Health Guides
Health Resources for the Public
MedlinePlus, U.S. National Library of Medicine
Also available in Spanish: Virus del Zika
HealthReach, U.S. National Library of Medicine
Zika
Also available in Spanish, Portuguese, and other languages.
Office of Human Services Emergency Preparedness and Response, Administration for Children and Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
