What
toxiccheese
That's awesome! Maybe the game can have a spin-off infotainment version that educates people on real life diseases and how they spread.
http://www.facebook.com/johnnewton29 John Newton
Thats cool. The makers of Panfemic must be pretty pissed though XD
Greyskull
Exactly what I was going to say. But hey, there had to be a System Shock before there was a a Dead Space; a Wasteland before Fallout, right?
http://twitter.com/gg_lam gilbert lam
Fallout might as well have been Wasteland 2.  Made by same people at Interplay. They just didn't have the license which belonged to EA.  Of course there will soon be an official Wasteland 2 so look forward to making some enemies explode like a blood sausage.
Greyskull
Any idea if EA still pwns the Wasteland i.p.? God I hope not.
homosaur
Not like they haven't had years to do something themselves. Plus plague fic is not exactly earth shattering originality.
Zephram
So let me get this straight... they want to spread awareness, yet they wont make the talk public. Let's hope this 'logic' isn't representative of their scientific methodology.
Haliaeetus
Unless it was hosted on the Emory campus, it would be nearly impossible.  With the stuff that the CDC studies, their compound is like a fortress, and they don't want people just wandering around in there.
Zephram
Hmm... good point. Although you would think that they would find a way to make it available to the public.
Jacob Gehman
The point of the talk is specific for CDC about ideas; obviously this isn't a scientific study. It's about a casual game and how it might have an impact on public education.
We won't see the talk, but we may vary well see the results of the talk. Which, curiously, is how pretty much every idea the public sees happens.
MidianGTX
They want to talk about how to spread awareness through games, they don't want to talk about how to spread awareness through talks about spreading awareness through games, so why would the talk need to be public?
LCDDreams
Very cool!
SporadicMovement
A government that used to want to destroy the industry is now embracing it.  Good news for all of us gamers.
Bronxsta
Was interested in this game. How deep is it? Any replay value/different difficult levels? And is the zombie IAP worth getting?
the fish
I play it since it came out every now and than. First played through on normal, later on brutal to unlock cheats and the other plagues. I still play it. I would say its definitely worth the 99 cents, even if you only play through every plague once.
homosaur
Just spend the damn dollar.
metalmandave83
Someone should YouTube this.
metalmandave83
It is a good game btw. My girlfriend has been playing this every day for a week. I introduced her to it. I got bored with it but I also don't get into strategy games. For 99 cents I say give it a shot. You don't need the IAP so don't worry about that.
http://www.facebook.com/james.vaughan.9887 James Vaughan
I'm really looking forwards to it - hope to learn a lot! Will definitely let everyone know how it goes when I get back!
Dan Shirley
Cheers Buddy,  it's a great game.
PureRumble
If... u get back. Perhaps they have ulterior motives 
HelperMonkey
I don't know, man.  Did you see The Walking Dead?  "Once these doors close they don't open again."  ...And then you're vaporized in an enormous ball of fire.
http://www.facebook.com/james.vaughan.9887 James Vaughan
lol - I will watch out for any creepy ai
chickaber
