of people live in poverty
1.9 million
What the World Food Programme is doing in Guinea
Emergency support for communities affected by Ebola
In Guinea, WFP helps communities affected by the Ebola outbreak, assisting people in areas with intense, widespread transmission of this devastating disease. WFP helps contact cases and their households, Ebola patients and their caretakers, and Ebola victims, including survivors and orphans. WFP continues to work with partners to get the number of Ebola cases to zero, as well as helping communities to transition out of crisis and into recovery.
Food assistance and nutrition
WFP provides life-saving food supplies to vulnerable people, including children under 5, pregnant and nursing women, people living with HIV/AIDS and their families, and patients undergoing treatment for tuberculosis (TB). Improved food security prevents and reduces maternal malnutrition, low birth weight rates and malnutrition for children under the age of 5. It also increases the success rates of treatment for diseases such as TB and HIV.
Resilience building
WFP works with the Guinean government, other UN agencies, and national NGOs to implement and incentivize activities designed to reduce food insecurity and strengthen Guinea’s ability to respond to disasters.
School meals
WFP provides hot school meals to 248,930 children in 1,605 schools throughout the school year. This aims to improve the attendance rates of elementary school students. As an incentive to encourage girls to stay enrolled in school, WFP provides take-home food supplies to girls enrolled in the final grade.
Support to local farmers
To enhance the resilience of fragile communities, WFP supports communities to produce locally grown food that can be used for school meals programmes. This increases food diversity and encourages communities to provide increasing supplies of healthy home-grown food to local school canteens.
Guinea news and stories
Go to page
Partners and donors
Achieving Zero Hunger is the work of many. Our work in Guinea is made possible by the support and collaboration of our partners and donors, including:
Ministry of Education
