difficulty breathing and swallowing .
What types of health care professionals treat Ebola hemorrhagic fever?
Because Ebola infections can be rapidly spread to others and because health care workers can be easily infected by patients, the CDC and other agencies recommend that only highly trained personnel treat Ebola patients. This treatment involves high-level barrier techniques to protect all health care professionals (hospital care workers, nurses, doctors, lab technicians, janitors, and hospital infectious-disease-control personnel). Unfortunately, these trained individuals and resources are often not available in the Ebola high risk areas. Ideally, individuals diagnosed with Ebola in the U.S. should be treated in specific designated treatment centers and treatment monitored by the CDC. Types of specialists who may treat Ebola-infected patients are emergency medicine specialists, infectious disease specialists, critical care doctors and nurses, pulmonologists, hematologists, hospitalists, and hospital infection-control personnel.
What is the contagious period for the Ebola virus?
For those patients who survive infection, they may remain contagious for approximately 21-42 days after symptoms abate. However, the viruses can be recovered from semen, breast milk , spinal column, and ocular fluids. It is unclear, according to the CDC, if viruses can be transmitted by these fluids, although the CDC suggests that Ebola can be spread by semen and suggest male survivors of the disease abstain from sex or use a condom for all sexual activity.
What is the incubation period for the Ebola virus?
Ebola virus disease symptoms and signs may appear from about two to 21 days after exposure (average incubation period is eight to 10 days). It is unclear why some patients can survive and others die from this disease, but patients who die usually have a poor immune response to the virus. Patients who survive have symptoms that can be severe for a week or two; recovery is often slow (weeks to months) and some survivors have chronic problems such as fatigue and eye problems .
Quick GuideEbola Virus: Outbreak, Symptoms, and Treatment
How do health care professionals diagnose Ebola hemorrhagic fever?
Ebola hemorrhagic fever is diagnosed preliminarily by clinical suspicion due to association with other individuals with Ebola and with the early symptoms described above. Within a few days after symptoms develop, tests such as ELISA, PCR, and virus isolation can provide definitive diagnosis. Later in the disease or if the patient recovers, IgM and IgG antibodies against the infecting Ebola strain can be detected; similarly, studies using immunohistochemistry testing, PCR, and virus isolation in deceased patients is also done usually for epidemiological purposes.
What is the medical treatment for Ebola hemorrhagic fever?
Share Your Story
According to the CDC and others, standard treatment for Ebola hemorrhagic fever is still limited to supportive therapy. Supportive therapy is balancing the patient's fluid and electrolytes , maintaining their oxygen status and blood pressure , and treating such patients for any complicating infections. Any patients suspected of having Ebola hemorrhagic fever should be isolated, and caregivers should wear protective garments. Currently, there is no specific medical treatment for Ebola hemorrhagic fever according to the CDC. The CDC recommends the following medical treatments for Ebola-infected patients:
Providing intravenous fluids (IV) and balancing electrolytes (body salts)
Maintaining oxygen status and blood pressure
Treating other infections if they occur
Patients diagnosed with Ebola in the U.S. are sent to special hospitals certified to treat Ebola patients. (Contact the CDC immediately for information for experimental vaccines , treatment protocols, and patient care and/or transfer to an appropriate facility.) The special hospitals were certified because of the problems experienced in a Texas hospital where the first patient in the U.S. was diagnosed with Ebola and subsequently spread the disease to hospital workers. Experimental medical treatments of Ebola infections include immune serum, antiviral drugs , possible blood transfusions, and supportive care in an intensive-care hospital facility approved by the CDC to treat Ebola infections.
What are complications of Ebola hemorrhagic fever?
Ebola hemorrhagic fever often has many complications; organ failures, severe bleeding, jaundice , delirium , shock, seizures , coma , and death (about 50%-100% of infected patients). Those patients fortunate enough to survive Ebola hemorrhagic fever still may have complications that may take many months to resolve. Survivors may experience weakness, fatigue , headaches , hair loss , hepatitis , sensory changes, and inflammation of organs (for example, the testicles and the eyes). Some may have Ebola linger in their semen for months and others may have the virus latently infect their eye(s).
Male patients may have detectable Ebola viruses in their semen for as long as six months after they survive the infection. Researchers consider the chance of getting infected with Ebola from semen is very low; however they recommend utilizing condoms for six months; some experts suggest a longer time.
It is apparent that we don't know everything about how to cure Ebola infections. A physician who was thought to be cured of Ebola, Dr. Ian Crozier, in fall 2014 developed burning light sensitivity in his eyes. He returned to Emory University where he was treated and after several tests he was found to have Ebola infection in his eyes. However, only the fluid removed by needle from his eyes showed viable virus; his tears and the outer membrane of his eyes had no detectable virus. Consequently, health care professionals considered the patient not to be able to spread the virus. One of the complications was that his blue eye color turned green. Fortunately, for Dr. Crosier, treatment with steroids and antiviral agents allowed his eyes to return to normal. This unusual circumstance has suggested that follow-up eye exams are likely to be important in patients who survive Ebola infections.
What is the prognosis of Ebola hemorrhagic fever?
The prognosis of Ebola hemorrhagic fever is often poor; the death rate of this disease ranges from 50%-100%, and those who survive may experience the complications listed above. However, early diagnosis and treatment of Ebola may greatly increase the patient's chance for survival. Unfortunately, this disease has been mainly located in countries where medical care is often difficult to obtain, especially in rural areas of Africa. Current statistics available on the ongoing 2014-2015 outbreak (as of April 2016) of Ebola are summarized below:
Total suspected, probable, and confirmed infections worldwide equal 28,616, and total deaths equal 11,310 for a death rate or death toll of approximately 41%. An occasional new infection (at a low level) and deaths of current patients are unlikely to change these numbers substantially as the epidemic outbreak has ended according to the CDC. Fortunately, this epidemic of 2014-2016 did not become a pandemic but did show how rapidly a relatively rare disease like Ebola can rapidly infect a large number of individuals in this modern-day society.
Is it possible to prevent Ebola hemorrhagic fever? Is there an Ebola vaccine?
