Sensitivity analysis: a comparison of countries’ extended (18) risk score with a simpler set (10).
4. DISCUSSION
A risk scoring framework is a useful tool for predicting the impact of infectious disease outbreaks as well as those of public health emergencies. This would inform the decision to initiate prompt response to mitigate the impact of such outbreaks. A higher risk score indicates the need for a more proactive, aggressive, and prompt response compare to a lower risk score. Risk scores and health preparedness indices could also help to improve disease surveillance and strengthen planning and engagement at the community level.[ 11 ]
This risk scoring framework is a tool that can be used by local and state governments, health organizations, and other stakeholders to rapidly assess and predict the outbreak characteristic and plan control measures.
In this study, we developed a risk scoring framework (Table I ) that could be used to prioritize epidemic response, predict the impact and extent of an outbreak, and therefore enhance rapid and effective response in outbreaks of high risk. We showed that the overall risk score for Ebola-affected countries correlated well with the magnitude and impact of the epidemic in each country, with the worst affected countries, Guinea (score = 44), Liberia (score = 43), and Sierra Leone (score = 43) scoring highest, and the United States (20) and the United Kingdom (21) scoring lowest. Nigeria had the lowest risk score (31) in all the West African countries. We further demonstrated that a simplified framework with fewer measures performs equally well in predicting risk. This indicates that a complex scoring system with multiple parameters is not necessary, and that for utility in the field, a shorter scoring system can be used.
Such a risk scoring system, if in use prior to the 2014 EVD epidemic, might have flagged the need for urgent intervention by WHO and improved the response time. In the case of the West African Ebola outbreak, there have been criticisms of the severely delayed international response, with the outbreak documented in March 2014 but sustained control efforts not undertaken until August/September 2014, close to the peak of the epidemic.[ 12 ] Epidemics rise exponentially, so every day of delay averted saves lives.
Such a risk scoring system could have correctly predicted that the risk of the outbreak in Guinea, Liberia, or Sierra Leone would be extremely high.[ 13 ] The predictive parameters of the risk scoring framework can further be demonstrated by comparing the outcome of the EVD outbreak in the less affected West African countries with the three most widely affected countries.
In Nigeria, it was observed that early detection of the virus through accessible diagnostic facilities, as well as swift quarantine and contact tracing procedures, was central to the success of curtailing the outbreak swiftly in Nigeria.[ 13 ] The same diagnostic capability also aided containment of the outbreak in Senegal and Mali.[ 14 ] These all correspond with a lower risk score in the health system. In Guinea, in contrast, it took several weeks to months before the initial cases were detected,[ 15 ] a factor associated with a higher risk score. This prolonged period of exposure to Ebola virus before detection generated many cases and several chains of transmission, including into the capital, Conakry, which made the outbreak difficult to control.[ 16 ] When diagnostic facilities became available in the course of the outbreak, the local capacity was quickly overwhelmed, which is another factor associated with higher risk.[ 16 ] This same factor also expedited the transmission of the virus into Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Other factors associated with lower risk scores such as effective and prompt contact tracing in addition to adequate infection control practices correlated with reduction in the geographic range and size of EVD outbreaks.[ 17 ] Nigeria replicated the structure and system of its well-established Polio Emergency Operation Centre to combat the EVD outbreak.[ 6, 18 ] The country promptly deployed about 200 health-care staff for contact tracing[ 19 ] and within a month, over 26,000 homes were visited and over 18,000 people with EVD contacts were interviewed.[ 6, 9, 18 ] The contact tracing teams were able to trace every generation of contact and those who escaped quarantine were tracked down and brought under supervision.[ 9, 20, 21 ] Contact tracing was also very prompt and effective in Senegal and Mali. The staff strength in Mali was particularly increased by training and engaging medical students.[ 14 ]
In contrast, in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, insufficient health-care staff, difficulty and lack of ability to trace contacts, and failure to isolate infected individuals complicated the outbreak.[ 17 ] In places where contact tracing occurred, isolation and monitoring were deficient.[ 22 ]
The existing structure of the health system before the outbreak has also been found to be central to the outcome of the EVD outbreak. The health-care systems in Liberia, Guinea, and Sierra Leone are associated with high-risk scores as they were weak before the outbreak, with a severe shortage of health-care workers.[ 18 ] The impact of decades of wars and civil unrest (high-risk factors) in those countries increased the risk and impacted health systems. Those years were marked with fleeing health-care workers, infrastructure destruction, and interruption of supplies of drugs and medical equipment.[ 23 ] Nigeria has a robust health system compared to Liberia, Guinea, and Sierra Leone, and has higher health professional density and more advanced surveillance experience in other disease conditions, which was leveraged in responding to the EVD outbreak.[ 18 ] The polio program experience in Nigeria played a critical role in stopping Ebola transmission.[ 6 ] Senegal and Mali also have relatively well-funded health systems.[ 14 ]
While there was a high level of coordination among, and cooperation with, local and international response agencies during the outbreak in Nigeria,[ 24 ] fear and distrust in the government and the health system characterized the outbreak in Liberia, Guinea, and Sierra Leone.[ 25 ] This has resulted in hiding of infected patients, escape of contacts from the surveillance system and patients from the treatment centers, high patronage of traditional healers, and hostility to both international and national response team.[ 22 ] The impact of traditions and culture on epidemics cannot be underestimated.
A country's resources are also in correlation with the extent and outcome of the outbreak. Nigeria has the highest GDP in Africa and ranks 23rd in the world.[ 18 ] The government, some private organizations, and individuals were able to quickly mobilize funds and all needed resources to contain the outbreak.[ 26 ] In contrast, the three most affected countries are in the group of the world's poorest countries.[ 22 ] This is due to the impact of wars and civil unrest on the economy. Another consequence of this poverty from civil unrest is a high rate of unemployment, leading to high mobility across the porous borders of the three countries.[ 22 ] This high interborder mobility has resulted in transnational importation and reinfection of the EVD, thereby making containment difficult.
Other factors that helped Nigeria in containing the EVD outbreak were: ensuring safe and dignified burial practices with a ban on national and international corpse transfer,[ 27 ] establishment of diagnostic centers, treatment centers, and research groups across the six geopolitical zones of the country, effective audio-visual and social media communication, especially on infection control practices and destigmatization,[ 26 ] as well as strengthened Port Health surveillance.[ 20, 28 ]
In contrast, behavioral, cultural, and traditional practices fueled the EVD outbreak in Liberia, Guinea, and Sierra Leone.[ 25 ] About 60% of cases of EVD have been linked with unsafe burial practices such as washing, kissing, and touching of corpses.[ 22 ] The use of traditional healers in these countries is very high[ 25 ] and spread of Ebola virus in a significant chain of transmission in the Sierra Leone outbreak was associated with attending the funeral ceremony of a traditional healer who died after treating EVD patients.[ 29 ]
Nigeria and Senegal may not be directly comparable with the three worst affected countries because the former countries had ample time to prepare and prevent the outbreak.[ 18 ] Further, the outbreak in both countries started with a single case, which made contact tracing easier. However, the fact remains that they were well positioned and resourced for containment of the outbreak, while the three worst affected countries had several common risk factors that propagated the outbreak and its impacts. These would have been flagged as needing urgent intervention with availability of a risk score framework.
The United States had a score of 21, while the United Kingdom scored 22, far lower than the lowest score of 32 (Nigeria) in West African countries. The risk score, if applied before the outbreak, would have predicted a low likelihood of outbreak, less significant impact, and easier containment in developed countries when compared with the developing countries such as the West African countries.[ 25 ]
One of the limitations of this study includes the fact that some of the criteria for assigning risk scores were based on gray literature sources, which may not have a proven statistical basis. Another limitation is based on the fact that some of the risk factors may not be suitable for all infectious diseases (e.g., mosquito-borne infections). Further, this tool was made for Ebola and has not been validated for other diseases.
Finally, our aim was to develop a risk framework that has multiple components that can be used to rapidly assess and predict the outbreak risks for a country in terms of likelihood of spread, epidemic preparedness, magnitude, and impact. It is flexible and can be improved upon.[ 30 ] This can aid prioritization of epidemic response and timely intervention.
5. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we have developed and demonstrated the utility of a risk score framework for epidemic response. Criteria that reflect socioeconomic, geographical, traditional/cultural, and health systems related parameters can be used to identify countries at high risk of catastrophic outcomes in terms of morbidity and mortality. This framework can be modified and used by epidemiologists and public health personnel as a tool for identifying and prioritizing the need for urgent intervention in global epidemics and may reduce costly delays in response.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by NHMRC Centre for Research Excellence Grant APP1107393 (Integrated Systems for Epidemic Response [ISER]).
Ancillary
