shoes made from genetically engineered stingrays
0
0
0
rayfish footwear brings customization to a whole new level, by offering customers the opportunity to generate their own pair  of personalized sneakers made from genuine stingray leather. *
though they have allegedly been in operation for more than a decade, 2011 marked a milestone in which the company successfully  engineered their first fully bio-customized stingray using a technique which the have developed that allows you to design  your own transgenic stingray. at the rayfish footwear labs, they purportedly use the DNA which the have stored in their genetic library,  to identify the genes responsible for color and pattern, implanting the synthetic ‘supergene’ cluster into fetal rays  before they are born. as they grow and mature, they express the predetermined patterns on their skin.  markings and coloration from dozens of varying species can be combined, resulting in an infinite variety of shoe designs.
using the brand’s online ‘ grow sneaker tool ‘ you can select elements from dozens of animal patterns and remix them  into something that nature itself could never have even imagined. working on the manufacturing principle of ‘one fish, one shoe’,  rayfish footwear raises stingrays in their thai aquaculture facility where the family-run business creates these handcrafted shoes.
keep reading for more info and video…
detail image via fastco.design
up close look at the genuine stingray leather image via fastco.design
the genetic foundation of the company’s work and its press relations raise high suspicions about the veracity of the project. extremely interesting conceptually as a look into a possible future, the company and its customizable grown sneakers also raise real, relevant questions into the practices of the leather, fashion, and design industries.
video simulating the bio-customization process
Not cool man, not cool…
gz/gtz
let’s keep on like this…fucking nature…
why you publish this kind of stuff?
Du
May 30, 2012
That is disgusting. How can they sleep at night?
If I ever see anyone wearing these shoes I will go out of my way to make sure they never wear them again.
Sax
Im waiting for the next shoes collection made of phosphorescent human \”leather\”
Dieter
May 30, 2012
There’s a hefty dose of wisdom for you: humans and sting rays are of equal value. Right. We probably shouldn’t grow cotton for canvas shoes either: cotton should be allowed to run free! What ever happened to survival (and fashion) of the fittest?
This company isn’t doing anything different from manufacturers of suede shoes, just taking greater control over their supply chain. In fact, I think sacrificing a few rays and then hand-making the shoes in a family-owned shop is more ethically defensible than the synthetic shoes being manufactured by Chinese child laborers.
Get your priorities straight folks. Thanks for another interesting tip, Design Boom.
Dada Man
This company isn’t doing anything different from manufacturers of suede shoes…
could you name a suede shoes that does genetic manipulation ?
linearprioritizing
This company isn’t doing anything different from manufacturers of suede shoes…
could you name a suede shoes company that does genetic manipulation ?
linearprioritizing
Oh god, this is no design at all, this is cruelty 
Marta
May 31, 2012
I think it’s baller. Prove to me stingray fetus have feelings and this harms them…? The only thing these manufacturers are taking from the stingray is their ability to camouflage, which is obsolete because they’re farmed by people. Genetically modified food is sold and consumed all the time, GM mammals included. If this is happening to our food why not modify animals for aesthetic qualities? This is a an exciting new opportunity.
Thanks Design Boom
I completely agree with spitz, linearprioritizing and Dada Man.
Honestly, how is this any different from other animal products that are farmed for our consumption?
Cows? Pigs? Fish? Sheep? The list continues…
I think this is a unique and interesting exploration, and pretty cool fashion direction. Love it!
Venus
This is disgusting, what is wrong with people? Can we not leave nature alone? These creatures belong in our oceans, not in a laboratory providing us with colourful footware.
Nicci
….and nicci fails to understand anything that any of the rest of us are talking about.
gonzo
Doesn’t that sound a little “too strange to be true” ?
Charles
May 31, 2012
What a waste of an animal life!
(And those who presume that those objecting to this don’t object to similar use of other animals are, of course, cheating in that assumption.)
Daniel
we found a new species to destroy!  stupid mankind!
morgen
May 31, 2012
IF this is real, the science is very impressive but morally dubious. However, I reckon this is a hoax because not even the most self absorbed fashionista would do this (maybe… they might…) and normally anti GE groups or PETA would be screaming their heads off at the merest sniff of publicity.
I wouldn’t wear them because I’m not nearly cool enough.
Greenjacket
i think designboom has it right that the whole thing is a hoax. its absolutely great though. too clever for PETA to have done, but whoever did it is genius.
fox
sick, sick, sick and also disgusting, disgusting and disgusting : ((
roberto
May 31, 2012
If this is real, this is DISGUSTING and a horrible project. I can’t believe people are actually defending this!?!? What’s WRONG with you!?!?!?!?
Someone wrote “I think it’s baller. Prove to me stingray fetus have feelings and this harms them.”
Are you insane ? It’s sad to know some people still think Humans are superior to every other organism and have a right to do whatever they want as long as it benefits them. Disgusting and pathetic.
PS: Has anyone read Michael Crichton’s novel ‘Next’ ?
Jack
Awesome!  Sign me up for a pair with blue and yellow horizontal stripes!!  A bit wasteful, though?  Maybe in addition to the sneakers, they could ship a few frozen stingray steaks with your order – waste not want not.
Allen
Jun 01, 2012
< SICK of course. The skin may be, is original but the colors and patterns for my eye aren't; the skin is  sprayed or impregnated with pigments (some color irregularities can be seen if you look closer). I think that that kind intense colored symmetric mosaicism even with our knowledge and available molecular technologies today is difficult to achieve, also biology has its own unique rules and not are easily manipulated. I would not pay (attention!) 1800 USD for those shoes, even would not have them for free. Also I would not applaud that kind of pumped success, let it be commercial nor technological, because it's a SICK bio-??? trend.  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I6l1fzgJ4sY  STOP manipulating and abusing animals > recombinant DNA technology > the prefix BIO- > and those people who work for you in china or elsewhere.
@Greenjacket > not science in itself, scientist and artist who promote such idealism are morally dubious
mdefen
Jun 01, 2012
I’m 100% sure this is a hoax, and I should know – I work with synthetic biology. I know for certain that the few biological pattern generators described are most certainly not amenable to such a modular application in fish. That sort of combinatorial genetic programming is far from realized in even simple systems like brewers yeast, let alone a complex vertebrate. Aside from the obvious photoshopping that should have alerted any editor worth their salt, there’s a much more obvious proof. Why go through all the trouble of developing an incredibly complicated and novel technology when the same output can be achieved by simply dying leather? They’ve snuck a fairly obvious and clunky Rube Goldberg machine right by a whole host of people who didn’t bother to fact check with real scientists, or even look to see if Raymond Ong has any previous publications or any records of him performing science anywhere. (He doesn’t.)
Rick
