EBOLA THE RECOVERY
EBOLA: THE RECOVERY
The Ebola Virus outbreak derailed lives and livelihoods in some of the most vulnerable countries in the world, infecting over 28,600 people in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia, killing 11,300. In response, USAID led a U.S. Government effort, to contain the disease and bring the number of cases to zero. Despite this success, Ebola related fears and restrictions continue to have direct, negative impacts in all three countries. These include: a retraction in previous development gains; severely disrupted economic and social activity; and a decline in the delivery of essential government services.
USAID, in partnership with the host governments and international donors, is implementing a robust set of development programs to address the second order impacts and ensure that Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia and other nations in the region are prepared to effectively prevent, detect, and respond to future outbreaks.
FOCUS AND IMPACT OF EBOLA
USAID/Food for Peace, Global Health, and Global Development Lab Ebola recovery efforts aim to prevent the loss of development gains and strengthen key institutions and infrastructures whose weaknesses enabled the rapid spread of Ebola, or slowed the response.
5 KEY TARGET INTERVENTIONS
FOOD SECURITY
USAID/Food for Peace (FFP) is taking a market-based approach to support households, communities, and agricultural markets to recover from the food security impacts of the Ebola Virus Disease crisis. Learn more about Food Security
 
HEALTH SERVICES AND HEALTH SYSTEMS
The Ebola outbreak significantly reduced basic healthcare services in the three countries, including infant delivery, maternal care, and treatment of common diseases like malaria. Learn more about Health Services and Health Systems
 
INNOVATION TECHNOLOGY AND PARTNERSHIPS
National efforts to respond to the outbreak were hampered by communications and technology weaknesses in the health information systems (HIS) of all three countries. Learn more about innovation technology and partnerships
 
GOVERNANCE & ECONOMIC CRISIS MITIGATION
USAID supports programs that strengthen governments’ ability to provide needed services, attract private sector investment in local economies and empower civil society. Learn more about Governance & Economic Crisis Mitigation
 
GLOBAL HEALTH SECURITY AGENDA
The United States is in partnerships with, and support of, countries that are developing the capacity to prevent, detect and respond to future disease outbreaks. Learn more about the Global Health Security Agenda
 
