Puzzles
KILLER VIRUS
What is Ebola, has there been an outbreak in 2017, what are the symptoms, how is it spread and is there a vaccine? All you need to know
In December 2013, a two-year-old died after contracting Ebola in a rural village in Guinea and from there the virus spread through Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia
By Lizzie Parry
19th May 2017, 10:11 am
Updated: 19th May 2017, 10:43 am
AFTER rearing its ugly head in the West African nation of Guinea in December 2013, the Ebola virus swept through three nations, claiming more than 11,000 lives.
The pandemic crippled the already volatile health systems in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia.
PA:Press Association
In December 2013, after a two-year-old boy died from Ebola in a rural village in Guinea, the virus spread across three West African countries, reaching Nigeria, Spain, the US and the UK
Almost 30,000 people across the three nations were infected with the disease, which is spread via contact with an infected person's bodily fluids.
The outbreak was catastrophic, leaving whole communities in ruins, thousands of children orphans and millions facing starvation.
From its epicentre in Western Africa the epidemic reached Nigeria, Spain, the US and UK, only slowing in June 2016 - when the World Health Organisation declared the outbreak in Liberia over.
AP:Associated Press
From Guinea, the virus quickly spread to Sierra Leone and Liberia, killing more than 11,000 people during the most recent outbreak
But what is Ebola, where did the virus come from and why is it such a devastating disease?
Here, we reveal more about the deadly infection...
What is Ebola?
The Ebola virus, also known as Ebola haemorrhagic fever, is a disease that occurs in humans and primates.
The virus is part of the Filoviridae family, which also includes Marburg virus.
To date, scientists have identified five strains of Ebola - four of which are known to cause disease in humans.
The natural reservoir - or host of the virus - is thought to be the fruit bat.
Non-human primates are a secondary host, and like humans develop fatal symptoms, so are unlikely to be the reservoir.
In spite of the epidemic that swept West Africa from 2013 to 2015, scientists class Ebola as a virus that has a relatively low infection rate.
During that, the most recent and most widespread outbreak, one Ebola patient would typically pass the disease on to another two people.
That is compared with a disease like measles where one case can often lead to 18 new infections.
Has there been an outbreak in 2017?
The killer virus was announced as having returned in Democratic Republic of Congo in April 2017.
So far, one man has died from the disease, while two other people who came into contact with him have also died - though tests have yet to confirm their cause of death.
Health officials are investigating 17 suspected cases of the virus following an outbreak and are trying to trace 125 people thought to be linked to the cases identified in the remote north eastern province of Bas-Uele - which is near the border with Central African Republic.
Three people have so far died among the 19 suspected and confirmed cases , WHO’s Congo spokesman Eugene Kabambi said.
On April 22, the first confirmed case named the victim as a 45-year-old man.
The outbreak comes just a year after the end of an epidemic in West Africa killed more than 11,300 people mostly in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia.
This case marks the eighth outbreak in the country, since the virus was first discovered in 1976 in the nation, then called Zaire.
The virus was detected in regions close to the River Ebola, which gave the disease its name.
The outbreak could test a new experimental Ebola vaccine, that health experts hope could prevent a pandemic, like that seen sweeping West Africa from December 2013 to 2015.
Where did Ebola come from?
The Ebola virus was first identified by a team of scientists in what was then called Zaire, now known as Democratic Republic of the Congo, in 1976.
Until the last outbreak, the largest, most widespread and most deadly ever, records show regular bursts of Ebola virus did occur.
However, they tended to be confined to villages close to rainforests in Central and West Africa.
Infection has been recorded in humans through contact with infected chimpanzees, gorillas, fruit bats, monkeys, forest antelope and porcupines.
What are the symptoms and mortality rate?
Prior to the 2014 outbreak in Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia, the mortality rate of the Ebola virus had been between 25 and 89 per cent - with an average of 67 per cent.
During the West African outbreak mortality varied between 25 to 90 per cent.
The virus has an incubation period of two to 21 days, meaning symptoms can take up to three weeks to appear from the time of infection.
AP:Associated Press
The Ebola virus, also known as Ebola haemorrhagic fever, has an incubation period of two to 21 days, meaning symptoms can take up to three weeks to appear from the time of infection
Early symptoms of Ebola include:
fever
