Dehydration In Adults - Some Facts To Know
A magazine had published an advice related to the transmission of this virus, it was strongly proposed that the infected person must not touch the walls of the room because it might be possible that human sweat can be absorbed by the walls and stuck to it even preserving of an infected person who has been dead can puts you into a high risk of you to become infected and may die due to it.
4. You’ll be shocked but it’s true that up till now we do not have any vaccine to cop up with the Ebola Virus. Some days ago, it was announced in USA about the vaccine development in some medical firm and on estimation it might be released in 2016. But until then there will be many people infected or die by Ebola virus. Its infection is increasing drastically in the world and on an average the infection rate of Ebola virus has increased upto 15 people per day. But yet its growth is intensifying more and more every day.
5. We have not developed any cure of Ebola Virus so far. And even at this moment also the scientists are working on the cure of the Ebola Virus. Indeed many of them were working from years, but yet have not discovered any treatment for the Ebola virus2.127 people infected by the virus. An average of 15 persons is affected every day and yet many cases are not recorded as they infected and died without coming into the record.
3. Ebola virus can easily be transmitted from one person to another. It is yet not known that how people get infected but it is supposed that it has been spread by everything means the every portion of daily life is included in it, contact  with an infected person in any way through food, through infected animal’s fluids, human-to-human transmission whether direct contact with blood or through body fluids. A magazine had published an advice related to the transmission of this virus, it was strongly proposed that the infected person must not touch the walls of the room because it might be possible that human sweat can be absorbed by the walls and stuck to it even preserving of an infected person who has been dead can puts you into a high risk of you to become infected and may die due to it.
5. We have not developed any cure of Ebola Virus so far. And even at this moment also the scientists are working on the cure of the Ebola Virus. Indeed many of them were working from years, but yet have not discovered any treatment for the Ebola virus. There is not yet any sort of treatment that might prevent or have any effect on that lethal virus.
.
