H5N1
"Medicine is a social science, and politics is nothing else but medicine on a large scale"—Rudolf Virchow
November 29, 2017
Mobilizing experience from Ebola to address plague in Madagascar and future epidemics
Via The Lancet:  Mobilising experience from Ebola to address plague in Madagascar and future epidemics . Excerpt:
As of Nov 10, 2017, there were a total of 2119 confirmed, probable, and suspected cases of plague, and 171 deaths from plague in Madgascar. This outbreak is spreading throughout the country, affecting both rural and urban areas, and anthropologists have been mobilised by global health agencies to contribute to the emergency global health response. Many of these specialists previously worked on the 2014–16 Ebola virus disease epidemic in west Africa and possess experience and expertise gained from this context. How urgently these experts were sought out by public health programmes showed that the relevance of the social sciences in global health is being increasingly recognised. 
However, exactly how these cross-discipline collaborations can be most effectively implemented, how anthropology can best contribute to epidemic response, and how anthropologists should be prepared require additional reflection.  
The west African Ebola virus disease epidemic was the first time that social science researchers were called upon by UN agencies to be involved with a global health emergency response at every stage. Originally, anthropologists were asked to help identify and address barriers to controlling the spread of Ebola virus and to encourage compliance from local populations. However, this role quickly expanded. In addition to helping adapt Ebola-related messages and activities to specific contexts and populations, anthropologists helped shape understanding of the disease from a global health perspective. 
This approach included critiquing the overuse of the terms “socio-cultural factors” and “resistance” as catch-all explanations for the spread of the epidemic; insisting upon the need to conduct in-depth qualitative research to complement the rapid knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, and practices surveys proposed by many public health programmes; and adapting public health measures to local contexts. 
As the Madagascar plague epidemic expands, expert knowledge gained from the Ebola virus disease epidemic will be crucial to address topics that are relevant to both diseases—for example, avoidance of patients by health workers, hiding of the sick by their relatives, resistance to contact tracing and safe burials, over-reaction of the media, and discordance between the biomedical and lay representations of the illness. Anthropologists in Madagascar have been asked to examine burial practices, therapeutic itineraries, and the population's relationship to (and fear of) global health interventions. 
Although the contexts are different from the west African Ebola virus disease epidemic, this previous experience is useful to help anthropologists face current situations.
