          Caring for a trauma patient at JFK Medical Center. The Children's Ward at JFK Medical Center.
After a devastating fourteen-year civil war, Liberia is finally beginning to rebuild. But this task will not be easy. With 250,000 killed and 1.3 million displaced, Liberia’s population has suffered untold amounts, and, for many, this suffering continues. 80% of Liberians live below the poverty line, and 35% are undernourished. Many governmental and non-governmental organizations have begun pouring aid into Liberia, but the country clearly still has far to go.
Read more about Liberia's history .
Medical care in Liberia has reached a particularly low point. In a country of 3.5 million people, there are only 122 physicians and 668 nurses, leaving a ratio of approximately one doctor per 28,000 patients. Medical facilities, too, were devastated during the war, and shortages of supplies and equipment contribute to an ongoing health crisis. These circumstances have helped lead to an infant mortality rate of 157 out of 1,000 live births (compared to fewer than 7/1,000 in the United States) and a maternal mortality rate of 780 out of 100,000 live births (compared to 14/100,000 in the US).
Hospitals of Hope has worked in the past several years to help rebuild Liberia’s medical infrastructure, specifically at the John F. Kennedy Medical Center and ELWA Ministries. Our approach in Liberia has been three-pronged: providing essential equipment, training for medical professionals, and patient care.
Read more about Hospitals of Hope’s past work in Liberia .
We are not currently working in Liberia, but we may return to work there in the future as God opens doors. Please continue to pray for Liberia as they continue to rebuild!
 
Volunteer Stories
Oct 19 2011
"They were a beautiful and precious people who I now miss, after the short time we spent there."             Read more about a volunteer's time serving in the Bolivian jungle.
Latest News
Dec 11 2012
Our annual newsletter is now available to read. Get caught up on all the exciting news. Read it here !
Recent Blog Entries
