From there, many patients go on to develop:
diarrhea
reduced liver and kidney function
vomiting
30% to 50% of cases result in internal and external bleeding 4 to 5 days after the onset of symptoms. Although some people die as a result of shock due to multiple organ failures, most Ebola victims die as a result of severe dehydration from extensive vomiting and diarrhea.
During outbreaks, those at greatest risk of getting the viral infection are health care workers and the family and friends of the infected who have close contact with the patients.
Making the Diagnosis
Due to the fact that most Ebola infection symptoms such as weakness, fever, headache, and muscle pains are not specific to the disease, more common diseases need to be ruled out first, especially during the early stages of the infection when diagnosis is difficult to make. Common diseases with similar symptoms include malaria, typhoid fever, and cholera. The person's medical history is also looked at, with particular interest in whether the person was in contact with possible infected individuals or animals. People with suspected EVD should be quarantined while waiting for definitive diagnosis by laboratory tests.
There are many laboratory tests that can be used to diagnose Ebola virus disease. It is commonly and quickly done through detection of RNA and antibodies of the Ebola virus in the blood. In simple terms, these tests detect traces of the virus itself or our bodies’ defence response against the virus.
Treatment and Prevention
There is currently no cure for Ebola virus disease, nor are there any vaccines available to prevent infection. Treatment is supportive and typically involves rehydration, nutrition, and medications to manage symptoms (pain, fever, vomiting, etc.). The majority of people with EVD die from severe dehydration, so early supportive treatment is critical in improving the chances of survival.
Since there is no cure for the disease, the key in limiting outbreaks is to prevent transmission from animals to humans and between humans. There are several measures that need to be in place, including:
rapid quarantine of suspected infected animals – these animals should then be buried or burned promptly
handling all animals and their waste with gloves and other protective clothing
cooking animal products (meat and blood) thoroughly before eating
safe burial practises
wearing protective gear such as gloves and other personal protective equipment (such as face protection and long-sleeved gowns) when dealing with infected patients
safe injection practises
sanitation and sterilization of the environment and instruments
identification and isolation of infected individuals from the community
tracing contacts, including those during the incubation period
*All medications have both common (generic) and brand names. The brand name is what a specific manufacturer calls the product (e.g., Tylenol®). The common name is the medical name for the medication (e.g., acetaminophen). A medication may have many brand names, but only one common name. This article lists medications by their common names. For information on a given medication, check our Drug Information database. For more information on brand names, speak with your doctor or pharmacist.
All material copyright MediResource Inc. 1996 – 2017. Terms and conditions of use . The contents herein are for informational purposes only. Always seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Source: www.medbroadcast.com/condition/getcondition/Ebola-Virus-Disease
Related Health Tools
