of people live below the national poverty line
1.3 percent (±0.4)
HIV prevalence rate among adults
What the World Food Programme is doing in Sierra Leone
Maternal and child nutrition
Sierra Leone now provides free health care for pregnant and nursing mothers, and for under-fives. In partnership with the Ministry of Health and Sanitation, WFP implements a supplementary feeding programme to treat moderate acute malnutrition in lactating mothers and children under five. To prevent stunting, WFP also provides complementary feeding during the 1,000 day window to increase the nutrient density of diets.
Post-Ebola recovery
WFP aims to help meet the basic food and nutritional needs of vulnerable groups, including Ebola orphans and survivors, many of whom are experiencing chronic health problems and difficulties reintegrating into their communities. Sierra Leone was declared Ebola-free in January 2016, but in case of another flare-up, WFP stands ready to provide food rations to those who require treatment and to families affected by quarantine measures.
Food by prescription for people living with HIV and TB
With support from the Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, WFP provides Food-by-Prescription assistance to people living with HIV and Tuberculosis (TB). The programme provides HIV patients undergoing anti-retroviral treatment and TB patients enrolled in Directly Observed Treatment Short Course with nutritional support to promote adherence to therapy and treat moderate acute malnutrition.
Strengthening agricultural livelihoods
Through a Purchase for Progress (P4P) programme, WFP and its partners help smallholder farmer increase production capacity and enable them to access sustainable, formal markets. Through farmer-based organizations and agricultural business centres, WFP supports 10,000 farmers, 55 percent of whom are women, in building their capabilities in post-harvest management, quality handling, nutrition sensitive agriculture and women’s leadership.
Promoting resilience
To promote resilience, economic growth and agricultural development, WFP conducts food-for-training and asset creation activities to support the most food insecure communities throughout the country.
Emergency preparedness and response
Building on the infrastructure and logistics capacity established during the Ebola outbreak, WFP continues to support government efforts to maintain response readiness for future emergencies. WFP, in coordination with the Government’s Office of National Security, conducts logistics trainings and simulations on preparedness and response for Ebola flare-ups and other disasters, including seasonal flooding
Sierra Leone news and stories
Go to page
Partners and donors
Achieving Zero Hunger is the work of many. Our work in Sierra Leone is made possible by the support and collaboration of our partners and donors, including:
The Government of the Republic of Sierra Leone
