Abstract
Background
Treatment of blood samples from hemorrhagic fever virus (HFV)–infected patients with 0.1% detergents has been recommended for virus inactivation and subsequent safe laboratory testing. However, data on virus inactivation by this procedure are lacking. Here we show the effect of this procedure on diagnostic test results and infectious Ebola virus (EBOV) titers.
Methods
Serum and whole-blood samples were treated with 0.1% or 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) or 0.1% Triton X-100 and assayed for clinical chemistry and malaria antigen detection. Infectious EBOV titers were determined in SDS-treated plasma and whole blood from EBOV-infected nonhuman primates (NHPs). Infectious titers of EBOV or herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) in detergents-treated cell culture medium containing various serum concentrations were determined.
Results
Laboratory test results were not affected by 0.1% detergent treatment of blood samples, in contrast with 1% SDS treatment. However, 0.1% detergent treatment did not inactivate EBOV in blood samples from infected NHPs. Experiments with cell culture medium showed that virus inactivation by detergents is annulled at physiological serum concentrations.
Conclusions
Treatment of blood samples with 0.1% SDS or Triton X-100 does not inactivate EBOV. Inactivation protocols for HFV should be validated with serum and whole blood.
Possibilities to perform regular clinical laboratory tests are limited when dealing with samples from patients infected with hemorrhagic fever viruses (HFVs) due to biosafety issues. This again became painfully clear during the Ebola virus (EBOV) outbreak in West Africa. Ebola virus disease (EVD) is characterized by a gastrointestinal stage with profound diarrhea and vomiting leading to hypovolemia, systemic hypoperfusion, and electrolyte imbalances [ 1 ]. Although there are currently no approved antiviral therapies for EVD, aggressive fluid resuscitation, restoration of electrolyte imbalances, and treatment of coinfections are likely to improve survival of EVD patients [ 1–5 ]. During this outbreak, basic laboratory tests for infectious diseases and clinical chemistry parameters were sorely missed. This was not simply an issue for field settings; even in specialized laboratories, basic tests for disease management were unavailable or could not be performed due to safety issues. Such diagnostic tests are normally performed in laboratories with a lower biosafety level than is required for safe handling of EBOV-infected samples. In theory, tests could be performed in these laboratories after inactivation of EBOV. However, current tested and proven EBOV inactivation protocols, such as heat inactivation, gamma irradiation, or photoinducible alkylating agents, result in erroneous clinical chemistry test results, or specialized equipment that is often not available is needed [ 6–10 ]. In addition, the use of commercial lysis buffers containing guanidinium isothiocyanate in combination ethanol, a procedure to inactivate EBOV and extract EBOV RNA from blood samples prior to polymerase chain reaction analysis, would also result in erroneous clinical chemistry test results.
Ebola viruses are enveloped viruses and should be susceptible to inactivation by envelope-destroying detergents like Triton X-100 and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) under certain conditions. These detergents have long shelf-life at room temperature, are cheap, and are relatively nontoxic to humans. Previously it was shown that treatment of blood samples with 0.1% Triton X-100 does not affect results of clinical chemistry tests, malaria rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs), and several hematology tests [ 9 , 11–13 ]. Some have recommended this procedure to inactivate HFVs, including EBOV, in blood samples prior to diagnostic testing [ 9–15 ]. However, data on EBOV inactivation by 0.1% Triton X-100 are currently lacking. This prompted the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to state that 100% efficacy in inactivating EBOV by this procedure cannot be assumed [ 16 ]. Sodium dodecyl sulfate , another commonly used detergent for virus inactivation, has proven activity against enveloped viruses at concentrations of ≤0.1% and, in contrast to Triton X-100, even nonenveloped viruses [ 17–21 ]. Preliminary data suggest that EBOV in culture medium is inactivated by 0.1% SDS treatment [ 22 ]. These studies reported on inactivation of viruses present in culture medium containing low serum concentrations, but whole-blood or pure serum samples were not included. It is currently not known whether this procedure inactivates EBOV in pure serum or whole blood, nor is the effect of this procedure on diagnostic test results known.
In this study, we show the effect of treatment of serum and whole-blood samples with 0.1% SDS or Triton X-100 on results of clinical chemistry tests, malaria RDTs, and rapid blood-typing tests, as well as on infectious EBOV titers in blood samples from EBOV-infected nonhuman primates (NHPs). In addition, we performed EBOV inactivation experiments using cell culture medium mixed with serum at various ratios to delineate the effect of serum on the capacity of detergents to inactivate EBOV. To make more general statements on the inactivation of enveloped viruses in whole blood and serum, we included herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) in these experiments because ample data are available on the inactivation of this virus using detergents at concentrations of 0.1% [ 17–21 ].
METHODS
Ethics and Biosafety Statement
All animal work was performed in strict accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare, National Institutes of Health and the Animal Welfare Act, United States Department of Agriculture. Animal procedures were conducted under anesthesia by trained personnel under supervision of veterinary staff. All efforts were made to promote welfare and to minimize animal distress in accordance with recommendations from the Weatherall report for the use of NHPs. All work with infectious material was performed in the maximum containment laboratory at the Rocky Mountain Laboratories, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Hamilton, Montana, applying standard operating protocols approved by the Institutional Biosafety Committee. Materials from human subjects used in this study were from EBOV-negative patients. These materials were obtained for routine patient care. Leftovers of these materials were anonymized and used for this study. Informed consent for use of anonymized leftover patient material was waived. This procedure has been approved by the Medical Ethical Committee of the Erasmus MC (MEC-2015–306), as well as by Dutch law.
Inactivation Chemicals
Triton X-100 and ultrapure 10% (w/v) SDS aqueous solution were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and Invitrogen, respectively. A 10% (v/v) Triton X-100 working solution was prepared by mixing pure Triton X-100 with distilled water.
Clinical Chemistry
Serum samples were mixed 99:1 (v/v) with 10% SDS (final concentration 0.1%), 9:1 (v/v) with 10% SDS (1%), 99:1 (v/v) with 10% Triton X-100 (0.1%), or were not mixed (controls) and were incubated for 0, 30, or 60 minutes at room temperature and subsequently assayed for concentration of sodium, potassium, chloride, calcium, alanine transaminase, aspartate transaminase, gamma-glutamyl transferase, alkaline phosphatase, creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, ureic acid, amylase, albumin, total protein, and C-reactive protein (Piccolo Xpress analyzer, Abaxis, Union City, USA). For each parameter, 10 serum samples spanning the clinically relevant range for that particular parameter were used. Test results were corrected for the dilution factor caused by addition of Triton X-100 or SDS, and sodium test results were corrected for the amount of sodium present in SDS.
Malaria Rapid Antigen Test
Stored ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) whole-blood samples from 3 Plasmodium falciparum–positive patients were serially diluted in freshly collected malaria-negative EDTA whole blood. Malaria-free EDTA whole blood was used as a negative control. Samples were treated as described above and analyzed using the ICT Malarial Dual Test (cassette) (ICT Diagnostics, Cape Town, South Africa) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Two technicians interpreted the test results independently (1 blinded and 1 not blinded), and intensities of the visible histidine-rich protein 2 (HRP-2) and Plasmodium lactate dehydrogenase (pLDH) bands of a positive test were scored using a subjective scale ranging from ± (weakly positive) to 3+ (strongly positive).
Blood Group Typing
MDmulticard ABO-D CONFIRM blood typing cards (Medion Grifols Diagnostics AG, Düdingen, Switzerland) were used for blood group typing of 38 whole-blood samples treated with 1% SDS for 1 hour at room temperature, 0.1% SDS for 1 hour at room temperature, or not treated (controls). Blood types of the 38 samples were blood group A-positive, RhD-positive (A+RhD+; n = 5); A+RhD− (n = 5), B+RhD+ (n = 5), B+RhD− (n = 5), AB+RhD+ (n = 6), AB+RhD− (n = 2), O+RhD+ (n = 5), and O+RhD− (n = 5) as determined by the ABO/Rh blood group reference method AutoVue Innova system (Ortho Clinical Diagnostics, Tilburg, The Netherlands) [ 23 ]. MDmulticards were used according to the manufacturer’s instructions, except that SDS-treated samples were mixed with 100 µL of diluent F instead of 200 µL because this resulted in slightly better diffusion of the samples on the MDmulticard. Four persons scored the results independently (2 blinded and 2 not blinded).
Inactivation of Ebola Virus in Serum and Whole Blood from Ebola Virus–Infected Nonhuman Primates
Heparinized whole blood was collected and pooled from 3 rhesus macaques that were used as control animals for a previous vaccine study and euthanized due to EVD. The animals were challenged via intramuscular injection of 1000 PFUs of Ebola virus H.sapiens-tc/GUI/2014/Makona-WPGC07 [ 24 ]. One portion of pooled blood was used to generate plasma, and the remainder was used as whole blood. Plasma and whole blood were each divided into 3 aliquots for testing. Prior to addition of SDS, a 100-µL sample of blood and plasma was diluted in 900 µL of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; T0 control sample). Nineteen microliters of 10% SDS was added to each blood and serum sample, and 100-µL samples were removed at 10, 30, and 60 minutes, diluted in 900 µL of DMEM (Sigma, St. Louis, USA) with 2% fetal bovine serum (Gibco, Life Technologies Corporation, New York, USA), 2 mM of L-Glutamine (Gibco), 50 U/mL of penicillin (Gibco), and 50 µg/mL of streptomycin (Gibco). The 10-fold diluted sample was used as primary dilution in the titration procedure described below.
Quantitative Ebola Virus Infectivity Assay
Vero cells were seeded in 48-well flat-bottom plates (28080 cells/well) and cultured for 24 hours. Dilution plates were made by placing 900 µL of DMEM supplemented with 2% FBS, 1% L-Glutamine, and 1% pen/strep into each well of a 48-well plate. One hundred–microliter samples, taken at appropriate time points, were transferred to a well in the top row of the dilution plate (1:10 dilution). A dilution series was carried out by passing 100 µL sequentially down the plate. One hundred micoliters from each column of the dilution series was transferred to each of 4 columns of the cell plate. Plates were incubated at 37°C for 1 hours and washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS); 200 µL of DMEM with 2% FBS, 2 mM of L-Glutamine, 50 U/mL of penicillin, and 50 µg/mL of streptomycin was added per well; and plates were cultured at 37°C for 14 days. After 14 days, wells were scored for presence of cytopathic effect (CPE), and the 50% Tissue Culture Infectious Dose (TCID50) was calculated (Spearman-Karber method).
Quantitative Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1 Infectivity Assay
A cell-free HSV-1 stock (passage 4, clinical HSV-1 isolate) was prepared on Vero cells cultured in DMEM (Lonza, Breda, The Netherlands) supplemented with 2 mM of L-glutamin (Lonza), 0.08% sodium bicarbonate (Lonza), 2% 2-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazin-1-yl]ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) (Lonza), 100 U/mL of penicillin (Lonza), 100 µg/mL of streptomycin (Lonza), and 2.5 µg/mL of amphotericin B (Department of Pharmacy, ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands) and 1% FBS (Greiner Bio-One, Kremsmuenster, Austria). Vero cells were seeded in 96-well flat-bottom plates (20000 cells/well) and cultured for 24 hours. Virus stocks (starting dilution 1/50) were diluted using 5-fold dilution steps in DMEM supplemented with 1% FBS and tested in 8 replicates per dilution step. Plates were incubated at 36.5°C for 1 hour and washed twice with PBS, 200 µL of medium containing 10% FBS was added per well, and plates were cultured at 36.5°C for 7 days. After 7 days, wells were scored for presence of CPE, and the TCID50 was calculated (Spearman-Karber method).
Effect of Serum Concentration on Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1 and Ebola Virus Inactivation by Detergents
Herpes simplex virus type 1 was spiked in culture medium containing 0.98%, 9.8%, or 98% FBS prior to treatment with Triton X-100 (0.1%) or SDS (0.1%). Herpes simplex virus type 1 in 9.8% FBS and spiked with PBS served as control. Samples were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature, and subsequently infectivity in TCID50 was determined as described above. Experiments were performed in triplicate.
Ebola virus/Makona-C07 was spiked in culture medium containing 1%, 10%, or 95% FBS and Triton X-100 (0.1%), SDS (0.1%), or water in triplicate. Additionally, 1%, 10%, or 95% FBS containing Triton X-100 (0.1%), SDS (0.1%), or water without virus were run in triplicate to control for detergent effects on cells used in the titration. Samples were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. To remove the detergent, 1 mL of each sample was loaded into a 100 K MWCO Amicon Ultra Centrifugal filter (Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA) and spun at 14000 × g for 10 minutes. The samples were then rinsed 3 times by adding 1 mL of PBS then spinning at 14000 × g for 10 minutes before adding 1 mL of DMEM with 2% FBS, 2 mM of L-Glutamine, 50 U/mL of penicillin and 50 µg/mL of streptomycin, inverting the filter tube into a collection tube, and spinning at 1000 × g for 1 minute. The virus titer was determined out as described above with the following exception; 500 µL of the resulting viral suspension was placed undiluted in the top row of the dilution plate without dilution.
Statistical Analyses
Bland-Altman plots were constructed and linear regression curves were fitted through the data points (GraphPad Prism version 5). Proportional error was considered when the slope of the regression curve deviated significantly (P < .05) from zero. Positive percentage agreement (PPA) and negative percentage agreement (NPA) were calculated using Microsoft Excel 2010, and Cohen’s kappa coefficient was calculated with GraphPad QuickCalcs.
RESULTS
Diagnostic Test Results of Blood Samples Treated With Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate or Triton X-100
Mean test results for 0.1% SDS-treated samples deviated from the untreated test results by ≤ 10% except for alanine transaminase (−11%) after 30 minutes. Treatment with 1% SDS profoundly affected most test results ( Table 1 ). Mean test results for 0.1% Triton X-100–treated samples deviated from the untreated test results by ≤ 10% ( Table 2 ). Incubation of serum with 0.1% SDS or 0.1% Triton X-100 for 30 or 60 minutes did not result in proportional errors of clinical chemistry test results.
Table 1.
Effect of 0.1% SDS and 1% Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate on Clinical Chemistry Test Results
clinical chemistry parameter 
