Ebola virus disease and high-risk contacts fact sheet
Ebola virus disease and high-risk contacts fact sheet
Control guidelines
Ebola virus disease (formerly known as Ebola haemorrhagic fever) is a severe, often fatal illness, with a case fatality rate of up to 90%. It is one of the world’s most virulent diseases. The infection is transmitted by direct contact with the blood, body fluids and tissues of infected animals or people. Close contacts are asked to closely monitor their health for up to 21 days after contact.
Last updated:                 07 September 2016
Content 1
 
Information for people who may have had direct contact with a case
It has been identified that you may have had direct contact with a person who may have Ebola virus disease (EVD) which is the type of contact most likely to result in transmitting the infection. This fact sheet provides important information about the disease and what you need to do now.
What should I do to monitor my health and for how long?
You should measure your temperature with a thermometer and record it twice a day for 21 days following your last contact with the person with EVD. You should also monitor yourself for any other symptoms of EVD, as described below. Public health unit staff will contact you at least daily to follow-up.
What should I do if I become unwell?
If you have a fever, or start to feel any symptoms compatible with EVD, you should report this immediately to the public health unit in your state or territory - call the number you were provided or else call 1300 066 055.
If you are very unwell, you should not delay seeking medical attention first but make sure you tell the doctor/hospital and ambulance service that you have been identified as a close contact of a person with 'Ebola'.
As far as possible, you should avoid direct physical contact with any other person, until you have been told that it is okay to do so by your doctor or the public health unit.
What are the symptoms?
Ebola virus can cause a serious illness, with a sudden onset of fever, muscle and joint aches, weakness, and headache. The next stage is characterised by vomiting, diarrhoea, rash and malfunction of liver and kidneys.
Some cases present with profuse internal and external bleeding and some progress to multi-organ failure. Between 50 and 90% of cases of EVD will die of the disease.
How is it spread?
Ebola is introduced into the human population through close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected animals (e.g. through hunting or preparation of "bushmeat").
Ebola virus then spreads from person to person via contact with the blood, secretions, or other bodily fluids of infected people, and indirect contact with environments contaminated with such fluid, including in healthcare settings.
Transmission through sexual contact may occur up to three months after clinical recovery. Airborne transmission is not known to occur.
Traditional burial ceremonies conducted in affected areas of Africa are a known high risk activity for transmission.
What is Ebola virus disease (EVD)?
EVD is a serious and often fatal disease caused by a virus. There are several strains of the virus. EVD was previously called Ebola haemorrhagic fever.
Fruit bats are considered to be the natural host of Ebola viruses, with outbreaks amongst other species such as chimpanzees, gorillas, monkeys and forest antelope from time to time. There have been 24 outbreaks of Ebola Virus in Africa since the virus was first identified in 1976. While there is evidence of one strain of Ebola Virus being present in animal populations in some parts of Asia, there have been no reports of human illness outside of Africa.
Who is at risk?
People who are living in or travelling to affected areas of Africa may be at risk of infection; however, the risk of infection is extremely low unless there has been direct contact with the bodily fluids of an infected person or animal (alive or dead).
Caring for ill relatives is a known risk factor for infection, and healthcare workers, particularly those in resource poor settings with inadequate infection control are also at risk.
How is it prevented?
Good hygiene and infection control around EVD cases is the only way to prevent spread of disease. There is no vaccine for EVD. Hunting and contact with "bushmeat" in affected areas should be avoided.
How is it diagnosed?
EVD is diagnosed by a blood test that detects the virus. Urine and/or a swab from the throat or nose may also be examined to look for the virus. Testing for EVD is done in a public health laboratory with special biosafety facilities.
How is it treated?
There is currently no specific treatment for people who are sick with EVD, but general supportive medical care can be life-saving.
What is the public health response?
Special procedures to prevent the spread of EVD are in place to manage the situation in the event there is a case of EVD in Australia. These include:
Doctors and laboratories are required to notify state/territory health departments of any suspected cases.
Isolation of suspected cases from other people.
Identification of people who have been in contact with the case by Public Health authorities so that these people are given information about the risk of infection and monitored for any signs or symptoms of the disease.
Special safety guidelines including wearing protective equipment to prevent spread of Ebola Virus to health-care workers managing cases and laboratory staff handling specimens.
Public health unit staff will investigate all cases to find out how the infection occurred, identify other people at risk of infection, implement control measures and provide other advice.
How do I contact the relevant public health unit?
In NSW, call 1300 066 055 to get through to your local public health unit.
The public health unit may also provide you with an additional number to call to report if you are unwell.
Further information
