Ebola Virus and the University of Manitoba
Message from Susan M. Gottheil, Vice-Provost (Students)
The University of Manitoba is closely monitoring advisories from Manitoba Health, Healthy Living and Seniors (MHHLS), the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) and the World Health Organization (WHO) regarding the Ebola virus disease outbreak in West Africa.
According to PHAC, the risk in Canada is considered very low with no reported cases.
The U of M is following guidelines established by MHHLS, PHAC and WHO, and will provide updated information about the Ebola virus to the University community when there is new information that could potentially impact faculty, staff and students.
Students, staff and faculty should contact Health Links 24-hour phone line at 204-788-8200 or toll-free 1-888-315-9257 or visit wrha.mb.ca/healthinfo/healthlinks with any questions or concerns.
Current Actions:
University Health Service is closely monitoring the situation and will advise the University about appropriate communication needs and possible interventions should they become necessary.
All incoming international students from West Africa are being advised about the outbreak, possible travel complications if coming from impacted countries, symptoms of the Ebola virus, and to seek immediate health care should they become ill after arriving in this country.
A student travel restriction is being issued for the following countries: Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. This recommendation is consistent with PHAC’s Level 3 advisory from August 20, 2014. Revisions to this restriction will be made if PHAC makes changes in their recommendations.
The U of M encourages everyone to become familiar with symptoms and seek medical attention if you or someone you know experiences fever, intense weakness, muscle pain, headache and sore throat. Symptoms can begin 2 to 21 days after exposure, although 8 to 10 days is most common. Ebola is not an airborne virus. Transmission requires direct contact with blood or bodily secretions.
Helpful links
