Show More...
Ebola Virus
None of Carnival Cruise Lines' ships visit the region where Ebola cases are originating from, nor do our ships call in any countries with Level 3 CDC Travel Heath Notices. Any passengers or crew who have visited or traveled through Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea within 21 days of a cruise departure date will be denied boarding. Additionally, all guests sailing with us must answer a series of health screening questions during embarkation and, if deemed necessary, will be asked to submit to further medical screening prior to being allowed to board.
All cruise lines continue to monitor the situation closely, along with our colleagues in the rest of the travel industry. The cruise industry is in close, frequent contact with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the World Health Organization (WHO) for updates and guidance.
Screening Measures
Guest Services Department is pre-screening booked guests by contacting the few guests who have identified themselves as being citizens of the affected countries to ensure they have/or will not be visiting their homeland 21 or less before sailing. They will also be asked if they have been/or will be in contact with anyone from these three countries for the period of 21 days before sailing. Guests who answer yes to these questions will NOT be allowed to sail.
At embarkation, we are providing guests with a health questionnaire to screen for Ebola symptoms and travel history (in 21 days).
A screening area has been designated at embarkation for any guests answering yes to the questionnaire
Ship’s doctor or nurse will come out to embarkation to further assess guests who answer yes to any of the questions
These questions are in addition to the customary health screening process where we ask all guests if they have flu like symptoms like fever, vomiting or diarrhea.
Was this answer helpful?
Yes
No
Your rating has been submitted, please tell us how we can make this answer more useful.
Email *Required
