Deadly ebola outbreak kills at least 200 in West Africa, says World Health Organisation
By Africa correspondent Martin Cuddihy and wires
Updated June 06, 2014 11:03:23
Map: Guinea
The deadly ebola virus is now thought to have killed more than 200 people in West Africa, making it one of the worst ever outbreaks of the disease, the World Health Organisation (WHO) says.
WHO says 208 people have died in Guinea from the virus, with with 21 deaths registered between May 29 and June 1 alone.
The United Nations health agency says it has recorded 328 suspected and confirmed cases of ebola in Guinea, which puts the fatality rate in this latest outbreak close to 65 per cent.
WHO's comments undermine the government's claims that the number of ebola deaths was slowing.
On April 24, Guinea's health ministry said in a statement that the situation was "more and more under control thanks to measures taken by the government and its partners".
A Guinean presidential spokesman was not immediately available for comment and a health department spokesman declined to comment on the outbreak's resurgence.
More than half of the new deaths in Guinea were in the southern region of Gueckedou, the epicentre of the outbreak, which began in February near the Sierra Leone and Liberian borders.
In neighbouring Sierra Leone, there are almost 80 suspected cases and the death toll has risen to six in the last week alone.
Liberia was also increasingly affected. Earlier this year the country had seen 12 suspected and confirmed cases of ebola, including nine deaths, but had not seen any new cases for nearly two months.
A person believed to have been infected in Kailahun in Sierra Leone came across the border and died in the Liberian town of Foya, WHO said, pointing out that the dead body was taken back to Kailahun to be buried.
Outbreak challenging as relatives tend to dead
WHO has described West Africa's first-ever outbreak of the deadly haemorrhagic fever as one of the most challenging since the virus was first identified in 1976 in what is now the Democratic Republic of Congo.
In that outbreak, 280 people died, making it the deadliest outbreak on record.
The ebola virus can cause irreversible haemorrhaging and the complete shutdown of some organs. It is considered one of the most deadly diseases in the world and is highly contagious.
There is no vaccine or cure for ebola, with a fatality rate of up to 90 per cent.
Medicines Sans Frontiers (MSF) says the outbreak is difficult to contain because a lot of sick people are reluctant to seek help and they are tended by relatives.
MSF says authorities in West Africa are struggling to impress how important it is for mourners to not touch bodies during traditional funeral rituals.
WHO says it has deployed an extra five experts to the area to help stop the disease spreading and that it is observing about 600 people in Guinea identified as having possible contact with ebola.
ABC/wires
